Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Former President Donald Trump’s social media stock is plunging just ahead of the election, cutting deeply into his net worth.
After anabsurd spikeover the past five weeks that was based entirely on Trump’s perceived reelection prospects — and had nothing to do with the company’s actual business — Trump’s social media stock has tanked. It has now lost about 41% of its value in just three days.
Truth Social owner Trump Media & Technology Group’s share price plunged another 14% on Friday after tumbling 12% Thursday and 22% Wednesday — Trump Media’s worst one-day loss since going public in March.
After the closing bell on Tuesday, shares were priced at $51, valuing Trump’s dominant stake in the company at about $5.9 billion. On Friday, the value of Trump’s shares tumbled to $3.5 billion. That means Trump lost $2.4 billion in net worth since Tuesday.
Trump Media’s shares, which trade under the ticker “DJT,” have become aproxy for how traders think the presidential election will turn out.Prediction markets in recent days have moved toward projecting that Vice President Kamala Harris will win the election, even as polls clearly show a toss-up election with no clear favorite.
“Meme stocks, of which DJT is one, are very susceptible to momentum shifts,” said Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers, who noted a clear “vibe shift” in recent days’ prediction markets. “Last week’s spike in prediction markets was a boon to DJT; conversely a shift away would hurt the stock.”
The company’s fundamentals have nothing to do with why the stock is traded. Trump Media did not release any major news that would explain the nosedive.
“Remember, that stock is basically a binary, leveraged election wager,” Sosnick said. “If he wins, then there’s a case to be made for increasing its value. If he loses, it reverts to being a barely profitable company with scant revenues.”
Trump Media’s stock has been extraordinarily volatile all year. But between September 23 and Tuesday’s closing bell, Trump Media had quadrupled in value.
The enormous gains boosted Trump Media’s value to $10.3 billion as of Tuesday’s close. That means it was briefly worthmore than the implied value of X, the Elon Musk-owned social network formerly known as Twitter.
That’s despite the fact that X has about 70 million monthly active US users on iOS and Android, according to Similarweb data shared with CNN. That’s roughly 100 times Truth Social’s 698,000 monthly active US users.
Even Threads, Meta’s relatively new X competitor, has about 20 times the user base of Truth Social, according to Similarweb.
Trump Media’s fundamentals remain very modest for a company that is still valued at about $6 billion. For context, CBS owner Paramount Global, a company that Trump Media recently surpassed in market value, has brought in more than $14 billion in revenue so far this year.
But Trump Media has generated just $1.6 million of revenue this year.
George Kailas, CEO of Prospero.ai, a research platform that helps traders gather market intelligence, told CNN on Friday he’s not surprised by the sudden momentum shift for Trump Media because that’s what happens with meme stocks.
“It’s like a game of musical chairs. Everyone is happy when the music is playing and the stock is going up,” Kailas said. “But since it isn’t based on any kind of good tangible value, the second that stops, everyone panics…and the bottom falls out.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.