Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The owner of “woke-free” online marketplace PublicSquare exploded in value on Tuesday on news that Donald Trump Jr. is joining the tiny company’s board of directors.
Michael Seifert, the founder and CEO of PublicSquare’sparent company, PSQ Holdings, confirmed the arrival of Trump Jr. on the board on Tuesday afternoon.
“He invested in PublicSquare before our IPO and has never sold a share because he and I both believe that our Company has tremendous untapped potential, and we’re just getting started,” Seifert said in aposton X.
The arrival of Trump Jr. was first reported byBloomberg News.
That news catapulted the value of PSQ Holdings by around 90% as of midday Tuesday.
Those gains almost quadrupled after Seifert confirmed the board change, with PSQ Holdings ending the day up 270%. That means the company’s market value skyrocketed from $72 million on Monday to about $265 million by Tuesday’s closing bell.
“Don’s passion for creating a ‘cancel-proof’ economy, his years of strategic business experience, and his leadership within the shooting sports industry offer important expertise at the board level,” Seifert wrote on X.
PublicSquare hasdescribed itselfas “America’s woke-free marketplace,” a platform that connects shoppers with “valued-aligned businesses that refuse to succumb to the progressive ideology overtaking corporate America.”
The company says its commerce and payments ecosystem serves “customers and businesses that value life, family and freedom.” Beyond the “family-focused” marketplace, the company includes “cancel-proof” fintech and wholly-owned brands.
“We have experienced explosive growth” since launching in 2022, Seifert told CNN in an email, noting that revenue has increased from $500,000 in 2022 to $6.5 million last quarter alone.
The board of PSQ Holdings includes a number of other prominent Republicans, including former Nick Ayers, the former chief of staff to Vice President Mike Pence; former US Senator Kelly Loeffler; Blake Masters, who ran unsuccessfully for Arizona’s US Senate seat; and former Bank of America hedge fund executive Omeed Malik.
Malik is the president of 1789 Capital, an anti-ESG venture capital firm that Trump Jr. hasreportedlyjoined.
Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers, said investors are betting “there is some advantage to be gained by having the incoming president’s son as a company insider.”
“Don Jr. would of course have exceptional access to the leader of the free world, which could have inordinate benefits to otherwise small and somewhat obscure companies if that leads to greater exposure and access to government contracts,” Sosnick told CNN in an email.
A similar story played out last week in another little-known stock.
Shares of drone maker Unusual Machines skyrocketed 85% on November 27 after the Orlando firmannouncedthat Trump Jr. joined its advisory board. The company surged by another 89% the following day.
“The need for drones is obvious. It is also obvious that we must stop buying Chinese drones and Chinese drone parts,” Trump Jr. said in the press release. “I love what Unusual Machines is doing to bring drone manufacturing jobs back to the USA and am excited to take on a bigger role in the movement”.
Unusual Machines, like other companies that rely on imports from China, has warned its business could be hurt by tariff hikes on China.
President-elect Donald Trump said last week that he would lift tariffs on China by another 10% on his first day in office unless Beijing cracks down on fentanyl drug trafficking.
Over the weekend,Trump threatened to impose 100% tariffs on China, Russia and other BRICS nations unless they promise not to create a new currency or back a replacement to the US dollar.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.