Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Markets shook off any concern Tuesday about rising tensions between Russia and the United States.
The Dow ended the day down by 120 points, or 0.28%, after a volatile start. The blue-chip index dropped about 450 points shortly after the opening bell but swiftly rebounded. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq also bounced back from early losses, closing out the day up by 0.4% and 1%, respectively.
The price action comes after Moscowchanged its nuclear doctrinefollowing the Biden administration giving Ukraine permission to use longer-range weapons inside targets in Russia.
“Today is a reflection of concern that, after 1,000 days, the Russia-Ukraine conflict looks like it’s getting hotter,” said Art Hogan, chief market strategist at B. Riley Wealth Management.
Investors initially also piled into safe havens like gold and US debt. Gold prices increased on Tuesday and US Treasury rates dipped.
Ukraine fired US-madeATACMS missilesinto Russia’s Bryansk region, Russia’s Defense Ministry said Tuesday, in a major escalation.
The attack comes just two days after the Biden administration gave Kyiv thegreen lightto use the longer-range American weapons against targets inside Russia. On Sunday, President Joe Biden authorized Ukraine to use the longer-range missiles inside Russia, ending a monthslong prohibition aimed to avoid drastically escalating the conflict.
Oil prices, which surged at the start of the Russia-Ukraine war in 2022, were little changed Tuesday.
“In our view, the underlying trends for the equity market remain positive, but this news provides an excuse for the market to give back some of its rally,” said Keith Lerner, chief market strategist at Truist Advisory Services.
CNN’s Christian Edwards and Kostyantyn Gak contributed to this story.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.