Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Jaguar has unveiled a new logo that emphasizes its posh British pronunciation as it transitions into a “new era” that emphasizes its upcoming all-electric vehicle lineup.
The 102-year-old luxury automaker is replacing its former logo, resplendent in all capital letters, with a new one that is supposed to be a “powerful celebration of modernism,” the companyannouncedTuesday.
It’s also a little less of the American “Jag-wahr,” and a bit more of the traditional “Jag-you-are,” as it’s said across the pond.
Perhaps best known for its pricey race cars and luxurious sedans, Jaguar has stripped itself down to one model in the US, the F-Pace SUV, andstopped selling cars entirely in the British marketas it tries to re-invent itself as an electric vehicle maker.
The first electric vehicle after the company’s re-imagining is planned to go into production in 2026.
The gold-colored Jaguar letters, designed with a custom font, are spaced out and in lowercase, except for “G” and “U,” which the company says demonstrates the “unexpected by seamlessly blending upper and lowercase characters in visual harmony.”
Other changes to Jaguar’s branding include a redesigned pouncing cat logo, called the “Leaper,” and a new monogram thatincorporates the “J” and “R”in the brand name.Car and Driver reportsthat the Leaper, which has adorned its cars for several decades, is being eliminated in favor of the badge.
“This is a reimagining that recaptures the essence of Jaguar, returning it to the values that once made it so loved, but making it relevant for a contemporary audience,” said Gerry McGovern, Jaguar Land Rover’s chief creative officer, in apress release.
He even joked a press event that Jaguar has “not been sniffing the white stuff — this is real,” according toCar Dealer Magazine.
What all the new branding will look like on the cars will be unveiled at a Miami Art Week event on December 2.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.