Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Walgreens is closing approximately 1,200 locations as the drug store chain struggles to contend with online competitors and declining prescription drug payments.
By 2027, about one in seven Walgreens currently open will close its doors. About 500 Walgreens will close its doors over the next year, the drug store chain announced Tuesday.
Those closures represent a significant escalation from a few months ago, when the financially struggling companyannouncedin June it was shutting 300 underperforming locations as part of a multi-year optimization program under CEO Tim Wentworth. At the time, the company had said about a quarter of Walgreens stores were unprofitable, and the chain promised “imminent” changes.
Still, the company managed to post stronger-than-expected sales in the past quarter. Revenue at the chain rose 6% from the same quarter a year ago, but Walgreens reported a $3 billion loss largely because of a writedown of a Chinese pharmaceutical chain and a home care provider called CareCitrix.
The latest tranche of closures is “emblematic of a company that is in trouble and is trying to course correct,” according to Neil Saunders, retail analyst and managing director at GlobalData Retail.
“Walgreens spent years building its business through acquisitions and neglected the fundamentals of its stores and its retail operations,” he told CNN. “That has pushed a lot of outlets into a position where they are losing sales and are not generating a return.”
Shares of Walgreens (WBA) rose nearly 4% in premarket trading. However, its stock is down nearly 70% for the year.
The closures come amid a challenging time for drugstore chains, which are being hammered on a few fronts.
Major drugstore chains, including CVS and Rite Aid, have struggled in recent years because of declining profits from filling prescriptions. They’ve declined because of lower reimbursement rates forprescription drugsand new competition from Amazon.
Earlier this month, CVS announced it wascutting about 2,900 jobsas part of a $2 billion in cost savings initiative. The layoffs, which affect mostly corporate jobs, add to the 5,000 or so job reductionsdisclosedlast year.
Related articleWhy Walgreens, CVS and Rite Aid are closing thousands of drug stores across America
The front-end of drugstores, where they sell snacks and household staples, also face pressure from larger competitors, including Target, and even Dollar General’sgrowth has also hurt drug store chainsin rural areas.
In May, Walgreens slashed prices on more than1,000 items, following rivals in an effort to lure back inflation-weary shoppers turned off by high prices.
CEO Wentworth said in a statement that the “turnaround will take time, but we are confident it will yield significant financial and consumer benefits over the long term.”
For Saunders, Walgreens’ eliminating the “dead wood will help the company strengthen its financials over time, but it is a huge admission of failure.”
CNN’s Nathaniel Meyersohn contributed to this report.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.