Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The federal government is slapping American Airlines with a $50 million fine after a multi-agency investigation uncovered repeat violations of the rules designed to protect airline passengers who use wheelchairs.
The investigation by the Department of Transportation aided by the Justice Department’s civil rights division found that American made “numerous serious violations” of disabled passenger rules between 2019 and 2023.
In announcing the fine, Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg told reporters that American mishandled and damaged “thousands” of wheelchairs and failed to provide adequate assistance to disabled passengers, causing significant safety issues and an inconvenience for customers.
“One traveler with a disability told us in her words, ‘I was made to feel like a piece of luggage, so I do not fly anymore,’” Buttigieg said. “The bottom line is that the era of tolerating the poor treatment of wheelchair users on airplanes is over.”
The issue was highlighted in a November 2023 TikTokpost that showed American Airlines baggage handlers sliding a wheelchair down a chute attached to an airport jetway.
“These problems are not unique to American Airlines, and allegations of wheelchair mishandling and inadequate wheelchair assistance are far too common,” said the Department of Transportation announcement. “DOT has active investigations into similar violations at other US airlines.”
Buttigieg said the fine is the largest ever of its type. As part of the order against American, the Department of Transportation is also requiring the airline spend $25 million as a “credit” toward the total $50 million fine to reduce cases of damaged wheelchairs and make significant infrastructure upgrades. If the agency finds that American does not meet that requirement, it will fine it the airline the remaining $25 million.
In a statement, American Airlines says it has already spent $175 million this year on “services, infrastructure, training and new technology,” leading to a 20% improvement in its wheelchair and scooter handling rating since 2022.
“Despite these improvements, there are instances where the service the airline provides is disrupted, untimely, or results in harm to the passenger or their equipment,” American said in a statement. “American takes all these complaints and claims seriously and works hard to remediate them.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.