Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Target is expecting a surprisingly weak holiday shopping season, a potential warning sign for the retail industry.
The company forecast Wednesday that sales during the final quarter of the year will be flat, and Target lowered its profit forecast. Target also reported a sluggish sales increase of just 0.3% during its latest quarter.
Shares of Target (TGT) plunged 22% Wednesday. It was Target’s worst trading day in more than two years.
Target is a bellwether for consumers’ spending habits and the retail sector as a whole. The holiday shopping season is pivotal for retailers. While Target can survive a weak holiday stretch, many smaller companies depend on strong sales during the holidays to carry them through the following months.
Target is struggling because its core middle-class customer base has been strained by higher prices and pulled back on discretionary goods like home decor, electronics and nonessential clothing in favor of groceries and everyday essentials.
“Consumers tell us their budgets remain stretched and they’re shopping carefully as they work to overcome the cumulative impact of multiple years of price inflation,” CEO Brian Cornell said on a call with analysts.
But Target has also slumped because of its merchandise mix and higher prices compared to rivals like Walmart. The chain stocks more non-essential merchandise compared to competitors such as Walmart(WMT)and Costco(COST). More than half of Target’s merchandise is discretionary, making it more susceptible than its rivals to swings in consumer sentiment.
“Target may be losing share among its middle- to upper-income consumers to retailers like Amazon, Costco and Walmart,” Joseph Feldman, an analyst at Telsey Advisory Group, said in a note to clients Wednesday.
Target in recent years has added more food and essentials to its stores, but still trails Walmart, which gets around half of sales from groceries.
Target hascut priceson thousands of items in recent months to draw shoppers, but that had limited impact on sales.
While Target is struggling, other chains likeWalmart are surging.
Walmart’s US sales at stores open for at least a year grew 5.3% last quarter compared with the year prior, the company said Tuesday, and its profit grew 8.2% last quarter. Walmart raised its financial outlook, a signal it expects a strong holiday shopping season.
Walmart said it gained market share last quarter, driven “primarily from upper-income households.” Households making more than $100,000 a year accounted for 75% of the company’s gains.
TJX, the parent of TJ Maxx and Marshalls, also posted strong results during its latest quarter. TJX’s sales at stores open at least one year increased 3% last quarter and it raised its guidance.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.