Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Hyundai is the big awards winner at this year’s Detroit auto show, capturing both the Car of the Year and SUV of the Year honors.
The awards were two of three given by a panel of auto critics at the annual North American International Auto Show in Detroit.
Related articleToyota brings back the fast and sporty Supra
The third award, Truck of the Year, went to Fiat Chrysler’s Ram 1500 pickup. The awards are often promoted in marketing campaigns by the winning automakers.
Hyundai will have a lot to brag about in those commercials thanks to the awards given to Genesis, its new luxury brand created in 2015 to compete against lines like Toyota’s Lexus and Volkswagen’s Audi.
The Genesis G70, which took home the Detroit show’s Car of the Year award, had already been namedMotor Trend’s Car of the Yearin November.  A compact luxury competitor to small sporty sedans like the BMW 3-series and Audi A4, it’s the first all-new model introduced under theGenesis brand. The G70 beat the Honda Insight and the Volvo S60/V60, the two finalists in the category.
Genesis’ two larger cars, the G80 and G90, had previously been sold as Hyundais. The G70 has received excellent critical reviews for its combination of refinement, performance and sharp design.
The Hyundai Kona and the electric Kona EV took the top SUV honor. They beat out the Jaguar I-Pace, Jaguar’s first electric vehicle, and the Honda RDX, a traditional gas-powered SUV.
SUVs have become the key segment of the US auto market, driving Ford, General Motors and Fiat Chrysler to greatly scale back their traditional sedan offerings.
Related articleFord unveils its most powerful Mustang yet
In the truck category, Fiat Chrysler’s Ram 1500 beat out the Chevrolet Silverado 1500 and the GMC Sierra 1500, which are two versions of much the same truck from GM.
While the Ram 1500 maintains its famously aggressive appearance, with a tall grill up front, the 2019 model is completely redesigned.
Ram trucks have earned a reputation for clever functionality, such as the lockable “RamBox” built into the bed walls and a more car-like drive than most trucks.
The 2019 model of the Ram 1500, which was named Motor Trend’s Truck of the Year in November, is available with “mild hybrid” systems that help save fuel and a massive 12-inch touchscreen in the cabin
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.