Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Goodbye 99 Cents Only. Hello Dollar Tree.
Dollar Tree announced Wednesday it acquired leases for 170 of 99 Cents Only’s stores out of bankruptcy in Arizona, California, Nevada and Texas. Dollar Tree will reopen these stores with its own products under its brand beginning in the fall.
99 Cents Only hadfiled for bankruptcy in Apriland closed all of its 370 locations.
The two chains are very different, and the announcement is a sign of consolidation in the retail industry.
Related articleInflation is biting into Target’s ‘Tar-zhay’ luster
99 Cents Only was a regional chain and sold groceries. Dollar Tree, a national company with mostly suburban locations, primarily offers discretionary merchandise like party supplies and home goods. Dollar Tree was the last dollar store chain to sell everything for $1 beforeraising prices in 2021 to $1.25and above.
Dollar Tree also owns Family Dollar, based mostly in cities. Family Dollar has underperformed Dollar Tree and other discount chains in recent years, and it’sclosing 975 stores.
The acquisition of 99 Cents Only leases out of bankruptcy gives Dollar Tree a cheaper way to grow rather than building new stores and helps the Virginia-based chain extend its reach on the West Coast.
“Management felt that these locations are fundamentally good and in relatively short supply, so they took advantage of competitor weakness,” Michael Montani, an analyst at Evercore IRI, wrote in a note to clients Wednesday.
One challenge for Dollar Tree could be the size of 99 Cents Only stores.
99 Cents Only stores are on average approximately 20,000 square feet, more than double the size of a typical dollar store chain.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.