Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Journalists from multiple news organizations have been denied credentials to former President Donald Trump’s election night watch event in West Palm Beach, Florida, in retaliation for their coverage of Trump’s campaign.
Reporters at Politico, Axios and Puck were among those denied credentials. Some, like Politico, had been previously granted access to the Tuesday night event only to have the decision reversed.
Politico’s team of reporters and a photographer were initially approved to attend the event, but on Tuesday morning were surprised to find they had been denied credentials, a person familiar with the matter told CNN. The person suggested the decision was made in response to an article inPolitico magazine, which reported that a Trump campaign field director was fired for being a White nationalist.
A Politico spokesperson declined to comment.
Puck’s political correspondent Tara Palmeri was also set to broadcast from the event as part of Amazon’s election night special hosted by Brian Williams. But around the time Palmeripublished a pieceabout “anxiety” within the Trump campaign, her credential was denied.
“I know I told you that I would be covering the Trump election night party from Palm Beach but turns out I have pissed off Trump’s campaign manager with my reporting and they decided to deny my credentials,” Palmeri said on the podcast “Somebody’s Gotta Win.”
“I have been honest and fair this entire time covering this election and I will be now broadcasting in studio with Brian Williams from LA,” she added.
Related articleGoogle and Meta are blocking political ads to combat misinformation. Some experts say it’s too late
Puck co-founder and editor-in-chief Jon Kelly said in a statement the campaign’s decision was “unfortunate, but the impediment will not in any way prevent Tara or any of my partners from reporting rigorously and ferociously on the story of our time.”
A person familiar with the campaign’s decisions acknowledged that the reporters had been denied access because of their coverage, but pushed back on the notion it was because of “critical” coverage, claiming the reporting was “inaccurate.” The person said other reporters from the outlets would be able to attend the event.
Spokespeople for the Trump campaign did not respond to CNN’s request for comment about the denials, but campaign co-chair Chris LaCivitawrote on Xlast week that Palmeri “was DENIED credentials to enter Mar-a-largo [sic] to cover election night due to her ‘proclivity’ to write bullshit. well well well.”
After another user suggested that “should happen more often,” LaCivita wrote back “we have a list and are checking it twice.”
In the run-up to the election, Trump has regularly attacked the media. He has vowed to jail reporters who don’t reveal confidential sources, said media organizations should be investigated for “treason,” and said broadcasters should lose their licenses over perceived bias against him.
Axios reporter Sophia Cai was also denied a credential to the election night event shortly after she reported on “anxiety” within the Trump campaign ahead of Election Day, a person familiar with the matter told CNN.
Axios editor-in-chief Aja Whitaker-Moore defended Cai’s reporting in a statement, calling her an “excellent reporter who has covered the 2024 presidential election with essential, clinical coverage for Axios.”
The Trump campaign and his former administration have a history of revoking credentials for reporters, often in retribution over their coverage. In 2018, the Trump White House revoked CNN correspondent Jim Acosta’s press credential, only to be forced torestore the credentialafter CNN filed a lawsuit.
Clarification: A spokesperson for Voice of America said some staffers had been denied credentials to Trump’s event, although two were admitted. After publication of this story, a VOA staffer said they had not been denied access due to their coverage. A Mother Jones spokesperson said their staffers had been denied access to earlier Trump events but were granted credentials to the election night event.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.