Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Germany narrowly escaped a recession in the third quarter, official data showed Wednesday, offering some relief to Europe’s biggest economy as its fortunes falter.
Gross domestic product rose 0.2% in the July-to-September period driven by an increase in government and household spending, following a 0.3% contraction in the three months prior, according to Germany’s Federal Statistical Office (Destatis). Destatis revised down GDP figures for the second quarter from -0.1% previously.
Germany’s economyshrank last year for the first time since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. The outlook isn’t much brighter: The International Monetary Fund sees zero economic growth this year, marking the weakest performance among major economies.
A sharp drop in profit at Volkswagen only intensified the bad news on economic growth. The troubles facing the German economy are captured by the crisis at the country’s largest manufacturer, which couldclose factoriesin its home country for the first time in its 87-year history and cut thousands of jobs.
VolkswagensaidWednesday that operating profit for the nine months to the end of September fell 21% on the previous year to €12.9 billion ($14 billion), hurt by poor performance at its flagship brand and restructuring costs. Vehicle sales slipped 4% on particularly weak demand in China, where it islosing market shareto local electric vehicle brands.
The results “demonstrate the urgent need for action in a volatile environment characterized by intense competition,” chief financial officer Arno Antlitz said on a call with analysts and reporters, warning of “painful” decisions.
Related articleHistoric moment for Volkswagen: Automaker plans to close ‘at least’ 3 German plants and cut thousands of jobs
“We have not forgotten how to build great cars,” Antlitz continued, but stressed that costs in the automaker’s German operations “are far from being competitive.”
“Things cannot continue as they are now,” he added. The company will resume talks with labor unions and employee representatives Wednesday and discuss “possible plant closures in Germany,” Antlitz said.
Volkswagen later said in a statement that employee pay would need to be cut by 10% to protect jobs and safeguard the company’s future. The next round of negotiations will take place on November 21, with strikes possible starting December 1 if no agreement is reached.
The deterioration in Volkswagen’s prospects point to worsening conditions in the private sector in Germany. According to asurveypublished last week by S&P Global and Hamburg Commercial bank, manufacturing and services businesses this month recorded the steepest drop in employment in nearly four and a half years.
Business and consumer confidence are at a low ebb. “The biggest worry is currently the big pessimism in Germany,” said Marcel Fratzcher, president of the German Institute for Economic Research in Berlin.
“This mental depression, this incredible pessimism is maybe the strongest impediment in the short run,” he told CNN.
Volkswagen encapsulates the negativity gripping Germany. The carmaker’s woes will ripple through the entire automotive industry, which is the country’s single-largest sector accounting for 5% of GDP and employing almost 800,000 people — about 37% of whom work for Volkswagen, many in well paid jobs.
Volkswagen, which also owns Audi and Porsche, epitomizes the manufacturing prowess and export success that has turned Germany into one of the world’s biggest economies — which is now under grave threat.
“We are not experiencing a crisis in the automotive industry, we are experiencing a crisis in Germany as a business location,” a spokesperson for Germany’s auto association VDA said in a statement following an auto summit last month.
Like Volkswagen, Germany faces high labor costs, weak productivity andcompetition from China. It can no longer rely on red-hot demand for its exports in the world’s second largest economy, which is increasingly producing locally many of the goods that it used to import from Europe.
“China has become a rival (to Germany),” said Carsten Brzeski, global head of macroeconomics at Dutch bank ING.
Related articleThe ‘glory days’ for global automakers in China are over
According to a recentstudycommissioned by the Federation of German Industries (BDI), an umbrella organization for business lobby groups, one fifth of Germany’s industrial output is at risk between now and 2030, primarily due to high energy costs and shrinking markets for German goods.
“The lead that the country has built up over decades in areas such as combustion technology is losing importance, and the German export model is increasingly under pressure due to growing geopolitical tensions, global protectionism, and locational weaknesses,” the report, co-authored by the German Economic Institute (IW) and Boston Consulting Group, notes.
It points to Germany’s traditional cost disadvantages, such as high taxes and elevated labor and energy costs, and also cites the threat that an aging population poses to a traditionally strong supply of skilled workers.
The study concludes that the German economy needs “the biggest transformation effort since the postwar period,” requiring additional investments in everything from infrastructure and innovation to education and green technologies of around €1.4 trillion ($1.5 trillion) by 2030.
Yet an economic overhaul on this scale looks unlikely given tight constraints on government borrowing — the so-called “debt brake” — enshrined in Germany’s constitution.
A fractious three-way governing coalition has also obstructed policymaking for months and left the government lacking a clear vision for the country.
While lower inflation could help boost consumption next year, brighter economic fortunes may only come in 2026 when a new government is in place following general elections expected next September, according to Brzeski of ING.
“In my base case scenario we will have another year of a more or less stagnating economy,” he said.
This story has been updated with additional information.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.