Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Americans are living through one of thetoughest housing marketsin recent memory. It’s even tougher for young people who need to save up for a down payment, build up their credit score and jump through various other hoops before owning a home.
Home prices are risingfaster than wages, mortgage rates are still hovering near23-year highsand many Boomers across the country arerefusing to sell their homes. The National Association of Realtors’ affordability index — which takes into account mortgage rates, family incomes and home prices — has been hovering near decades-lows.
Homeownership is arguably a key part of the so-called American Dream, but for young people, it might be just that — a dream. We’d like to know how Americans younger than 31 are planning for their future given that it has become so unaffordable to own a home nowadays.
Have you given up on ever owning a home? Are you planning to rent forever and just spend your money on traveling? Do you plan on staying at your parents’ place for longer than you’d like? Or are you planning to eventually move somewhere more affordable?
Tell ushere.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.