Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Netflix has caught its biggest sports deal yet: the NFL.
The streaming service announced Wednesday a three-year deal to broadcast the league’s Christmas Day games, marking a major milestone for Netflix, whose sports ambitions have largely focused on producingdocumentariesandcreating live specials about golf and tennis.
This deal kicks off this year with Netflix airing globally two NFL games on Christmas. In 2025 and 2026, Netflix will stream “at least one” holiday game. Financial terms of the deal weren’t disclosed.
“There are no live annual events, sports or otherwise, that compare with the audiences NFL football attracts. We’re so excited that the NFL’s Christmas Day games will be only on Netflix,” said Bela Bajaria, Netflix’s chief content officer, in a release.
This year’s Christmas Day games will be revealed Wednesday night on the NFL Network and website. Anchors and commentators for Netflix’s games were also not immediately revealed.
“The NFL on Christmas has become a tradition and to partner with Netflix, a service whose biggest day of the year is typically this holiday, is the perfect combination to grow this event globally for NFL fans,” said Hans Schroeder, NFL’s executive VP of media distribution, in the release.
NFL games are typically the highest-rated shows on US TV every week during the season, and adding Netflix to its roster could help the league expand its audience domestically and abroad. The NFL will play five international games in three countries this upcoming season, the leagueannounced.
The deal means NFL is alsopartners with all the major US broadcast networksand most major streaming platforms, including a Thursday night game package with Amazon and Sunday Ticket on YouTube TV.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.