Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
United Auto Workers union President Shawn Fain said Tuesday the group plans to hold strike authorization votes against Stellantis because the automaker was failing to live up to guarantees it made during a labor deal struck last year.
In a speech to members Tuesday night, Fain said the UAW is prepared to hold strike authorization votes at one or more locals that represent Stellantis workers and to have those workers go on strike if the company does not meet union demands.
During the livestreamed speech, Fain said that the union would be “holding strike authorization votes at one or more Stellantis locals. And we will stand united to enforce our contract and save American jobs.”
Strike votes are common when a contract is nearing an end and negotiations on a new deal are beginning. In the past, the union agreed not to strike during the life of a contract.
But the union won the right in the 2023 agreements with Stellantis, General Motors and Ford to strike during the contract if there were plant closures or other violations of job protections. This strike, if it takes place, would be unprecedented.
“We are 100% within our rights and within our power to take strike action if necessary,” Fain said. “We are prepared to take strike action to make Stellantis keep the promise.”
Stellantis — which makes vehicles in North America under the Jeep, Ram, Dodge and Chrysler brands — had 43,000 UAW members nationwide at 19 manufacturing facilities at the time of last year’s strike. It is possible, since only some locals will be holding strike authorization votes, that only some plants will go on strike. But even a limited strike could affect operations at other Stellantis facilities.
Stellantis issued a statement on Tuesday denying it had confirmed a decision to move production of the Dodge Durango to Canada, or that it was in violation of the contract. It said it still had plenty of time within the four-and-a-half years of the contract to meet the agreed investment targets and vehicle production commitments.
“It is not surprising that they (the commitments) haven’t been fully realized in the first year,” the company said in reply to CNN. “Shawn Fain continues to allege that the company has violated the contract, but to date has provided no data or information to back up his claims. Instead, he continues to willfully damage the reputation of the company with his public attacks which is helpful to no one including his members.”
The company said the issues should be addressed in talks between the two sides.
“A strike does not benefit anyone – our customers, our dealers, the community and, most importantly, our employees,” it said.
Fain previously blasted a statement Stellantis had made on Monday, after the union alleged unfair labor practices by the carmaker. That statement said the company was carefully managing how and when to bring new vehicles to market.
“We aren’t the problem. The market isn’t the problem. (Stellantis CEO) Carlos Tavares is the problem,” he said.
This story has been updated with additional information.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.