Content is created by CNN Underscored’s team of editors who work independently from the CNN newsroom. When you buy through links on our site, we may earn a commission.Learn more
Nonalcoholic sparkling wine:Mionetto Alcohol-Removed Sparkling Wine
Nonalcoholic red wine:Non 7 Stewed Cherry and Coffee
Nonalcoholic white wine:Kolonne Null Verdejo Nonalcoholic White Wine
Nonalcoholic rosé wine:Thomson & Scott Noughty Alcohol-Free Rosé
Say goodbye to the days of spiced grape juice masquerading as nonalcoholic wine. A bevy of complex, flavorful alternatives are here to stay, ranging from excellentsparkling winesto adaptogen-infused concoctions that might even fool the snobbiest sommelier at your dinner table.
We gathered more than a dozen of these booze-free bubblies and nonalcoholic wines and picked the best. Some we taste-tested for months, while others come as recommendations from seasoned third-level sommelierDana Beninati. And just in case our list doesn’t cut it, we also asked our expert to explain how to find great nonalcoholic wines on your own.
You don’t need to know the difference between a zinfandel and a merlot to find an excellent bottle of nonalcoholic wine. Rather than focusing on a specific varietal, focus on bottles that offer a wealth of information, says Beninati, a food and wine educator and host ofDine with Dana.
It’s also worth knowing the difference between the different ways producers make nonalcoholic wine. Some unfermented nonalcoholic wines don’t — and have never — contained alcohol. Other alcohol-free wines are “dealcoholized.”
Related articleThe 32 best nonalcoholic drinks for Dry January and beyond
“The term means that the juice went through a full fermentation process, became wine and then the alcohol was removed,” Beninati says. “Dealcoholized wine is more authentic, with a broader range of flavors and a more nuanced palate, making it a great choice for those who enjoy the taste of wine but are also sober curious.”
Below, you’ll find some of the best nonalcoholic wines in both styles, including an award-winning organic sparkling rosé, a food-friendly white and a spiced red.
For fans of sparkling wine, Mionetto's alcohol-removed bubbly is "tough to beat," Beninati says, adding that it's "crispy, fruity and light." Seeing as its (alcoholic) prosecco won oursparkling wine taste test, we're also fans of the Italian producer.
Travelers and hikers rejoice! Leitz not only offers gorgeous,large bottlesof its signature Eins Zwei Zero Rosé but this classic concoction comes in cans, perfect for popping into abackpackorcoolerfor a beach day or road trip. This refreshing sparkling pinot noir rosé is a 23-calorie, low-sugar beverage with a light minerality and flavors of bright red fruits.
Hailing from Spain, this sparkling rosé earns high praise from Beninati, who enjoys its complex flavor, something she says is a rarity among nonalcoholic wines. Pair it with seafood or white meat, or simply drink it on its own.
This award-winning organic sparkling rosé is smooth, juicy and bright, with a hint of peach. It’s a great nonalcoholic substitute that feels festive and special. Beauty and fashion editor Sophie Shaw keeps a bottle in the fridge for whenever the celebratory mood strikes.
“I also love givingFrench Bloom’s Discovery Set— which comes with its sparkling nonalcoholic chardonnay and rosé, accompanied by two crystal flutes — for a sweet and eleganthostess gift,” she adds.
A Los Angeles screenwriter friend recently told us that wehadto try Grüvi’s alcohol-free Dry Secco for this article, and boy, was he right. A dead ringer for champagne, this bright sparkling white wine offers just enough tartness and floral notes for us to get our fix. Plus, it’s completely gluten- and sulfate-free.
One of the best and most prominent dealcoholized wine brands on the market, Thomson & Scott has created a sophisticated, slightly sweet sparkling chardonnay with notes of apples in this bestselling bottle. Made with organic grapes from vineyards in southern Spain, this bright, flavorful wine has been dealcoholized through vacuum distillation.
This organic pinot noir isn't just alcohol-free. It's also free of pesticides, preservatives and sulfates. On top of that, Beninati commends Le Petit Beret's producer Dominique Laporte for perfecting its flavor for years before release.
Another excellent and popular nonalcoholic red wine, Ariel’s 2021 Cabernet Sauvignon is dealcoholized via a gentle cold-filtration process, which helps preserve richness and flavor. Not only is this one of the more wallet-friendly bottles on our list but it’s oak-aged and has fantastic aromas of black pepper and dark forest berries.
An easy-to-drink, easy-to-pair-with-food red blend from Geisen, this bottle is also surprisingly affordable. If you’re trying to find a smooth, dry nonalcoholic red wine to serve at your next cocktail party or family dinner, this libation made with New Zealand merlot and cabernet franc grapes is sure to be a winner.
Tart, earthy and complex, Non’s Stewed Cherry and Coffee features a bright cherry taste, peppered with rich spice blends, like garam masala, allspice and nutmeg. The result? A deeply satisfying wine alternative that sits somewhere between a sparkling rosé and a well-craftedmocktail. If you’re searching for something fruitier, the brand’s1 Salted Raspberry and Chamomileblend is also fantastic over ice.
Pairing with food? Gourmands should reach for this tropical white, says Beninati, who calls it "very food-friendly." And check outKolonne Null's other winesfor a broad selection of nonalcoholic rosés, reds and whites from some of Europe's most prestigious regions.
Kally uses chardonnay verjuice to present a wine-like alternative as fruity, herbal and botanical flavors unfold within each bottle. Orchard Sage offers a pleasing, slightly mysterious sip that blends notes of lemon, sage, elderflower and decaffeinated green tea extracts. But honestly, we recommend tasting Kally’s flavors blindly so you can appreciate the full effect without being swayed by any specific ingredient list callouts.
In the extensive testing for this article, Geisen stood out as another widely available and totally delicious purveyor of dealcoholized wines that taste (almost) as good as the real thing. This alcohol-free Pinot Gris is one of their best, with light floral notes and hints of lychee and pear.
A dealcoholized hit from legendary Studio Null, the new Grüner Weiss wine is sweet, easy to drink and floral. Crafted with grapes from a certified sustainable vineyard in Austria and aged in stainless steel, it’s every bit as complex and satisfying as its alcoholic counterpoints.

If you’re partial to reds, we also loved Studio Null’s popularPrickly Redthat serves up a full-bodied front end with a dry, tannic and carbonic finish.
Concocted with sustainably grown fruits, cold-brewed tea and just the right amount of fermentation, Three Spirit’s Blurred Vines series is designed to combine plant magic with ritualized nonalcoholic drinking. Sharp is chock-full of mineral salts, L-theanine, vitamin D and amino acids intended to create a mental boost for maximum socializing, sans the hangover.
With this fab pink bottle by Thomson & Scott, you really can rosé all day with your bae (and feel great doing it). Offering a dealcoholized, Provençal-style rosé wine from the Western Cape region of South Africa, this sought-after bottle has notes of peach and fresh berries. The best part? It’s only 19 calories per 100 milliliters.
This fan-favorite rosé from South Africa looks as good as it tastes, impressing with floral and berry-dominant notes and a slightly sweet finish. And thanks to Misty Cliffs' gentle dealcoholization process, it gets close to the flavor of a traditional rosé.
Don’t expect your alcohol-free red to taste like a classic bottle of Chianti. “Nonalcoholic wines taste a lot like grape juice but with some sass!” Beninati explains, adding that it’s more exciting than juice but less complex than traditional wine.
The label “nonalcoholic wine” is a bit of a misnomer. “The term encompasses several production methods and is governed by differing regulations from country to country,” Beninati says. In the US, nonalcoholic wines can contain up to 0.5% ABV (the same rule applies tononalcoholic beer), though there are some alcohol-freewines and spiritsthat have never been fermented and are truly nonalcoholic.
“Generally, trained beverage professionals can easily identify nonalcoholic wines from a lineup of traditional, but the addition of natural flavors and chemical modulators that mimic the aroma, tingle or heat of alcohol, are making this harder and harder,” Beninati says. If you want an alcohol-free bottle that tastes closer to traditional wine, find a dealcoholized wine.
On the contrary, nonalcoholic wines typically containmoresugar. “Some methods of making nonalcoholic wine halt the process of fermentation before it is complete, in order to limit the amount of alcohol produced,” Beninati says. “This means that some sugar is still present in the final wine, making it taste quite sweet.”
Maxwell Shukuyais an associate writer for CNN Underscored who covers updates across a variety of verticals. He has a particular passion for gear, especially when it comes to coffee, hiking and climbing.
Note: The prices above reflect the retailers' listed price at the time of publication.
Receive product recommendations, reviews and deals three times a week.
By entering your email address, you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
By clicking 'Sign up', you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
Opt out via thePrivacy Policy.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.