Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The Federal Trade Commission on Thursday said it is proposing a rule to ban employers from imposing noncompete agreements on workers and to rescind all existingnoncompete agreements.
The FTC’s reasoning: Such agreements, which affect millions of rank-and-file employees and independent contractors across industries, in addition to business executives, havesuppressed competition, wages and entrepreneurship.
“Research shows that employers’ use of noncompetes torestrict workers’ mobilitysignificantly suppresses workers’ wages — even for those not subject to noncompetes, or subject to noncompetes that are unenforceable under state law,” said Elizabeth Wilkins, Director of the Office of Policy Planning. “The proposed rule would ensure that employers can’t exploit their outsized bargaining power to limit workers’ opportunities and stifle competition.”
What to do if you're asked to sign a non-compete agreement
Theproposed rulewas cheered by the liberal-leaning Economic Policy Institute.
“Why do we need this rule? The only source of power nonunionized workers have vis-à-vis their employers is their ability to quit and take a job elsewhere. So, SURPRISE, employers are using noncompete agreements to cut that source of worker power off at [the] knees,” the organization said in a statement.
Still, the proposal’s broad parameters, if finalized, are likely to be challenged in court.
“As written, this could apply to the janitor and the CEO alike,” said employment attorney Ashley Herd, founder of ManagerMethod.com and a former human resources executive.
One thing the proposed rule wouldn’t do is ban employers from imposing other types of employment restrictions, such as non-disclosure agreements or non-solicitation agreements that ban employees from poaching a company’s customers when they leave.
But even those could get nixed, the FTC said, if “they are so broad in scope that they function as noncompetes.”
When might an actual ban take effect? It could take many months, and possibly push into next year.
The proposed rule will be open for public comment for 60 days after which the FTC will review the comments and possibly amend the rule before issuing a final version.
But given the broad implications of the proposal Herd said she wouldn’t be surprised if the deliberation process gets extended by at least a few months.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.