Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
US stocks closed at record highs on Friday, notching their best week all year after Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election.
The S&P 500 rose 0.38% on Friday, briefly crossing 6,000 points for the first time ever, before closing at about 5,996. The Dow rose about 260 points, or 0.59%, surpassing a record 44,000 points before closing at 43,989.
Both the S&P and the Dow had their best week in a year.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq climbed by about 0.09% Friday after topping 19,000 points on Wednesday for the first time ever. The US dollar gained slightly after a week-long rally and Treasury yields dipped.
Investors are responding to how Trump’s victory might transform the business landscape in the US.
Markets had a milestone week as investors adjusted to Trump’s victory and started to evaluate the policies touted by his campaign, such as his proposal to lower the corporate tax rate.
“There is this huge perception of a business-friendly, tax-friendly regime coming into place, especially with [Republicans] winning the Senate,” said Michael Block, chief operating officer at AgentSmyth.
The week’s historic gains were largely boosted by a massive post-election rally on Wednesday. The Dow soared 1,507 points, or 3.57%, to record a single-day gain of more than 1,000 points for the first time since November 2022.
Related articleMarkets close at record highs as Trump is reelected
Markets are rallying off the clarity provided by Trump’s swift victory in the presidential election. Investors piled into US stocks as Trump’s reelection gave markets a boost of clarity sooner than expected.
Markets hate volatility. When there is uncertainty, such as waiting for election results, investors can get spooked and slow down trading.
Previously, concern that Trump and his allies might contest the election results had put a cloud over investor sentiment. Initial market consensus included uncertainty over when the presidential election might be called, said Keith Lerner, co-chief investment officer and chief market strategist at Truist Advisory Services.
Yet after Trump’s swift victory in the electoral college, that clarity settled in, Lerner said.
“Historically, you get a pre-election dip. Normally, once there is clarity you get a bump,” Lerner said. “Clarity leads to people being more comfortable.”
Also giving markets a slight nudge upwards, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates by an expected quarter point on Thursday, contributing to investor optimism.
Traders seek out opportunities to profit, and stocks expected to perform well under a Trump administration saw record gains this week. With the election results, some investors turned toward Trump trades, or betting on stocks associated with the president-elect.
Related articleFrom prison companies to Tesla: These stocks are soaring off the Trump victory
For example, Trump’s own media company, Trump Media & Technology, saw a surge in its share price after the election, which has since faded.
GEO Group (GEO), a private prison operator, saw its stock surge nearly 76% across the week, climbing to its highest point since 2018, when Trump was first in office.
Elon Musk’s Tesla rose 8.18% on Friday, gaining an overall 32.27% this week and topping $1 trillion in valuation for the first time since 2022. The world’s richest man and his America PAC went all in for Trump’s campaign, contributing to his reelection bid.
Bitcoin surged to record highs, breaking 77,000 for the first time on Friday, on anticipation that Trump has embraced cryptocurrencies as part of his economic vision.
Markets move based on investor sentiment, and the historic gains this week are not certain to last. In a report before the presidential election, JPMorgan analysts predicted that under a “red wave,” stocks stood to gain through the end of 2024, but “the uncertainty around policy execution would become more prominent in 2025.”
“This was a market coiled for an extreme reaction one way or the other,” said Art Hogan, chief market strategist at B Riley Wealth Management. “The market is saying: We just elected a business-friendly president. … The initial reaction to a Trump administration is met with enthusiasm that may be temporary.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.