Content is created by CNN Underscored’s team of editors who work independently from the CNN newsroom. When you buy through links on our site, we may earn a commission.Learn more
Whether it’s approaching dawn of a new year or just simply the holidays, there’s a good chance you may be feeling more stressed out than usual right now.
A lot of us are already too busy, says wellness expertDr. Ann Kulze. “Then, you add to that the added responsibilities and obligations, more social engagements, entertaining people, family coming in,” she says. “That means, oh, I’ve got to clean up the yardand the house. And I have additional cooking. And if it’s Christmas, I’ve got to think about what I’m going to get for people,what presents I’m going to get.”
Fortunately, there are some ways to mitigate this stress, and we spoke with wellness and organization experts about ways to keep it all together even when you’d like to run away from it all.
Whether you need to get yourself or your whole family organized, setting up a plan for the busier times of year can help feel less frazzled when they arrive.
“I’m a big advocate of planners and use them to schedule both work and personal activities,” says Carolyn Kraut, founder and owner ofHands of Time Concierge. “There are also families that still hang wall calendars in their kitchens to track family activities, keeping them separate from their work calendars/planners.”
Luckily, there are plenty of planner options out there, from family-sized wall calendars to personal pocket agendas, desk planners and everything in between.
While it might be too late to start a family planning calendar this year, gear up for 2024 with this pretty floral version (there are three other designs as well) that has a large grid, stickers and a magnetic hanger.
When feelings of stress start to hit, one of the best things you can do is get your body moving.
“Exercise is a very effective way to deal with stress. Moving your body helps to release endorphins, which can balance your mood. The exercise doesn’t have to be complicated or strenuous. Something as simple as a walk can go a long way to help clear your mind,” says wellness entrepreneurShahada Karim,founder ofHabibi Bath & BodyandHabibi Sport.
And if you don’t have the time to get out of the house for a workout, finding a quiet space in your home for a quick yoga session is also a great option.
“Yoga is a rock star for stress resiliency [and] stress reduction, for reasons that are obvious and maybe some that we’re still trying to tease out,” explains Kulze. “It’s got the breathing, it’s got the stretching, it’s got the holding of these actual movements, which has this wonderful kind of tranquilizing effect on the body. And then beyond that, it’s the aerobic activity, particularly moderate to vigorous.”
Take a walk around the neighborhood and feel like you’re walking on air in these super-cushioned kicks that will keep your feet comfy and your body stress-free.
Do gentle stretches, a full workout or just give in to savasana withour favorite yoga mat.
Lightweight yet opaque, the Align’s buttery-soft feel and stretchiness are like no other legging. Check out our picks forthe best leggings here.
For a more affordable option, theseLululemon lookalikesare as much a pleasure to wear during workouts as they are while lounging around the house.
While you might be inclined to reach for cup after cup of coffee to keep you going through the busy season, try opting for some tea instead.
“I call them kind of superstar foods for stress protection,” Kulze says of stress-relieving teas. “Sipping on freshly brewed tea from camellia sinensis leaf — that’s green tea, black tea, oolong tea, white tea.”
You’ll need something to brew all the tea you’re going to be drinking, and this highly rated, well-priced kettle has the good looks and power to deliver hot water fast.
To make sure your tea stays toasty while you sip, we can’t say enough good things about the Ember mug, which keeps your hot drinks hot for hours on end. It comes in a holiday-appropriate, bright-red color too.
At any time of year, but especially during the busier seasons, getting good, quality sleep is essential.
“So often during the holiday times, frankly, people are entertaining more and going to more parties, and their sleep is disturbed,” says Kulze. “And that will exponentially decrease your stress resiliency and increase your propensity to feel stress when you shouldn’t, if you’re sleep-deprived.”
From a comfy pajama set to a plush pillow or a sunrise alarm clock, there are so manysleep productsthat can help to upgrade your bedtime ritual. But sometimes it can just be as simple as setting a bedtime and sticking to it to make sure you feel well rested for your busy days ahead.
Editors’ picks: Our favorite sleep products we’ve tested and actually loved
A lavender option to de-stress, this gift set is perfect to bring home for yourself or gift to a stressed friend or family member. Luxury soap, oil and natural hand cream — all made in the US.
Research has shown that a lamp with light intensity of 10,000 luxset 16 to 24 inches away from the eyes at a 45-degree angle for 30 minutes can help treat seasonal affective disorder and other mood disorders. This SAD lamp was our winner for thebest SAD lampdue to its well-thought-out controls and sleek packaging.
Sometimes all you really need is a hug, and weighted blankets likeour favorite ones at Bearabyprovide that calming pressure while you lie on the couch or drift off to sleep.
Editors’ picks: 36 nightstand essentials our editors can’t sleep without
And if you’ve only got a few moments to melt some stress away, try lighting an aromatherapy candle, rubbing on some oil or flicking on a diffuser for some relaxing inhalations. While there are many aromatherapy scents to choose from, there’s one you’ll see mentioned time and time again for helping with stress and anxiety.
“Lavender-scented products have been recommended for relaxation and stress relief for as long as I can remember,” says Kraut.
This set will help you with a relaxing routine that helps soothe you into peaceful slumber with the power of aromatherapy.
If a daily shower tends to be the only moment you have to yourself, make it more relaxing with the help of these aromatherapy shower steamers. Available in scents like lavender, eucalyptus and tea tree, there’s an option for every need. And if you need to gift someone a piece of relaxation, you can also graban aromatherapy gift settoo.
Note: The prices above reflect the retailers' listed price at the time of publication.
Receive product recommendations, reviews and deals three times a week.
By entering your email address, you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
By clicking 'Sign up', you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
Opt out via thePrivacy Policy.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.