Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Being a billionaire sounds kind of miserable.
This week, Twitter CEO Jack Dorseyrevealed several of his intense wellness habits to CNBC, and most of them sound like things normal people would explicitly avoid if they had gobs and gobs of money to throw around.
For instance, among the ice baths, hot sauna barrel sessions and jog-walking to work,  it seems Dorsey, 42, is also into the trendy eating practice of intermittent fasting.
Intermittent fasting, or IF, is exactly what it sounds like: You eat during a small window of time during every day, and the rest of the time you “fast,” or don’t eat. For example, some people choose an eight hour window in which to eat, and then hang back the other 16 hours of the day. The routine supposedly gives you a lot of time and energy for doing other stuff like running a massive tech company and journaling (another one of Dorsey’s trendy wellness habits).
Dorsey says he only eats one meal per weekday, and tries to fast on the weekends. (Which, by the way, is really extreme when it comes to intermittent fasting.)
“During the day, I feel so much more focused. … You have this very focused point of mind in terms of this drive,” Dorsey told CNBC about intermittent fasting habit.  “Certainly, the time back from breakfast and lunch allowed me to focus more on what my day is.”
Dorsey is far from the first high-profile name to sing IF’s praises. Stars like Hugh Jackman andJustin Therouxhavepraised intermittent fastingfor helping them get into shape for movie roles.
No, purposefully denying yourself food when you could just employ a whole phalanx of personal chefs isn’t just some rich person game. Intermittent fasting, if done responsibly, has some serious scientific backing.A 2016 study from the University of Southern Californiarevealed that strategic calorie restriction may actually help you live longer.
“Diet can have a remarkable effect on you,” Valter Longo, professor of gerontology at USC Davis, told CNN in 2016. “It can reprogram your body and put it on a path to live longer.”
Other studies have backed up IF’s long-ranging health claims. In 2018,three men with Type 2 diabetes reportedly reversed their need for insulinby adhering to an intermittent fasting schedule.
Other researchsuggests IF can reduce the risk of obesity, and in turn all of the health risks obesity presents. However, like any diet plan, IF isn’t for everyone and it isn’t a silver bullet for weight loss. And unfortunately, it won’t make you really rich.Experts recommend talking to your doctorto get some advice before hopping on the IF bandwagon.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.