Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
One year after the conclusion of theworld’s biggest trialof a four-day work week, a large majority of companies that took part were still allowing their employees to work a shorter week and more than half had made the change permanent.
For six months between June and December2022, workers at 61 organizations in the United Kingdom worked 80% of their usual hours — for the same pay — in exchange for promising to deliver 100% of their usual work.
At least 89% of those firms were still operating the policy and at least 51% had made the four-day week permanent at the end of 2023, according to areportpublished on February 21 by one of the organizers of the trial. Two companies did not respond to the researchers compiling the report.
The studywas released Wednesday by Autonomy, a think tank that ran the 2022 trial with nonprofit 4 Day Week Global and the 4 Day Week UK Campaign in partnership with researchers from Cambridge and Oxford universities, and Boston College.
The effects of reduced working hours have been overwhelmingly beneficial for staff and their companies, according to the report.
At the end of the trial, employees reported enjoying better physical and mental health, greater work-life balance and general life satisfaction, and less exhaustion from work — and these improvements have been maintained one year on.
“The key point is that the strong findings at six months are not due to novelty or short-term impacts. These effects are real and long-lasting,” said Juliet Schor, professor of sociology at Boston College, which surveyed staff at the companies that participated in the trial.
Related articleMost people would love a four-day workweek. But it doesn’t work for everyone
Managers and CEOs at 28of the organizations also agreed to answer additional questions. All said the four-day week had a positive impact on their company. Staff turnover fell at half of the organizations, almost a third said the policy had noticeably improved recruitment, and 82% reported beneficial effects on staff well-being.
The Autonomy report also highlights themethodsorganizations have used to sustain a four-day week, including revising the norms around meetings, work communications and prioritization.
“In this study, it has been clear the four-day week is not just a flash in the pan: companies around the UK have successfully been ‘making it stick’,” the authors wrote.
Close to half of the 61 organizations that took part in the 2022 trial are in marketing and advertising, professional services, and the nonprofit sector. The remainder span a range of industries, including construction, manufacturing, retail, healthcare, and arts and entertainment.
Calls to shorten the working week have multiplied in recent years. These calls have grown louder after millions of employees switched to remote work during the pandemic and stopped commuting, saving time and money.
There have been a number of experiments with the four-day week around the world, including atrialin 2022 across 33 companies, with the majority of workers based in the United States and Ireland.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.