Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Shares of former President Donald Trump’s social media company roared higher on the final day before theUS presidential election.
Trump Media & Technology Group (DJT), the parent company of Truth Social, surged 12% Monday. There was no apparent catalyst for the increase.
The stock has been highly volatile since it went public in March: Itquadrupled in valueover a five-week span beforeplunging by 41%over the past three trading sessions.
Traders have used Trump’s stock as a kind of barometer for the former president’s perceived reelection chances. If Trump is reelected, Truth Social could become an increasingly important communication tool, in the way that the former president used Twitter to disseminate policy and other information during his administration. If Vice President Kamala Harris wins, the business prospects for Truth Social are likely nonexistent.
The company’s shares do not trade on the fundamental health of the company’s business, which is minuscule by comparison with its better-known rivals such as X, TikTok and Instagram. The company is in a cash crunch and said it brought in less than $1 million in revenue in the past quarter.
Although polls show the presidential raceremains extremely tight, online betting markets in recent weeks have given Trump the edge over Harris, and market analysts credit the Trump stock’s increase to the trend in prediction sites.
Similarly, when Harris began to make a comeback in online betting markets, Trump’s media stock began to implode. The precipitous declineshaved $2.4 billion off Trump’s net worthbetween Wednesday and Friday, cutting deeply into the $3.6 billion in gains Trump made during the previous month.
Monday’s gains added more than $400 million back to Trump’s net worth.
Trump’s election chances on betting sites rebounded somewhat Monday. But it’s not clear that Monday’s stock gains can be attributed to anything in particular, and the stock didn’t quite follow the incremental moves of bids on the betting market. The company made no announcements, and Trump didn’t appear to make any statements that would juice the stock.
The Trump stock is a “meme stock,” a speculative trade that can vary wildly for just about any reason.
Thebroader stock marketMonday also bounced around a bit, although it was far less volatile than Trump’s media stock﻿.
The Dow fell 258 points, or 0.6%. The S&P 500 fell 0.3%, and the Nasdaq also fell 0.3% after spending much of the day in positive territory.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.