Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The launch of Boeing’slong-delayed 777X aircrafthas encountered another problem, forcing the company to pause testing and dealing yet another blow to Boeing’s reputation for quality.
Boeing discovered problems in a structural component between the engine and the plane’s wings in a test flight. Boeing said in a statement that it “identified a component that did not perform as designed” and it’s replacing the part to record “any learnings from the component.”The Air Currentwas first to report on the problems.
The 777X, billed by Boeing as the “world’s largest and most efficient twin-engine jet,” was supposed to enter service in 2020. It had expected to have delivered several hundred of the planes by now. But it has been plagued by delays and cost overruns.
Another stumbling block could further delay its revised 2025 launch date. Test flights of its four-aircraft fleet will resume “when ready,” Boeing added.
The 777 has been a big success for Boeing since it began service in 1995, and it remains the best selling wide-body aircraft. The 777X would provide airlines with another version of the plane, in addition to the popular but aging 777-300ER.
It’s another setback for Boeing, which is already embroiled in safety crisis following the mid-air blowout of one of its door plugs on a 737 Max flight operated by Alaska Airlines earlier this year. Boeing said that a lack of paperwork resulted in thefour bolts needed to hold the door plug in placenever being installed before the plane left the factory last year.
Related articleBoeing scores rare sales win over Airbus, despite ongoing safety issues
The 777X problems were just the latest in a host of safety andquality concernsrelated to Boeing assembly lines. Those problems have become the focus ofmultiple federal investigationsandwhistleblower revelations, and the cause ofdelays in jet deliveriesthat are causingheadaches for airlines and passengersaround the globe.
Last week, Boeing posted a rare win over Airbus in July orders for new planes. However, it still badly trails its rival in orders so far this year, as safety concerns continue to dent the company’s reputation.
Boeing haslost $33 billion since 2019— an eye-popping number that underscores how far the company has fallen from the days when its name was a byword for American quality.
Shares of Boeing (BA) fell 2% in premarket trading Tuesday. The stock is down nearly 30% for the year.
–CNN’s Chris Isidore and Tamara Hardingham-Gill contributed to this report.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.