Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Ford is investing $500 million in electric pickup truck maker Rivian, saying the two companies will work together to develop a new battery plug-in vehicle for Ford.
Ford(F)is playing catch-up to a number of other automakers’ efforts to develop electric vehicles. It does not currently sell any pure electric vehicles, although it sells some plug-in hybrid cars.
Company executives said Ford will still move ahead with its own electric vehicle development efforts, including a plug-in version of the Ford F-150 pickup. They said the vehicle it will develop with Rivian will be an addition to its future lineup.
“We don’t have all the answers and we don’t pretend to,” said Joe Hinrichs, president of Ford’s automotive unit. “We believe the next decade will be a transformative time in terms of electrification.”
Fordhas announced plans to spend$11 billion transforming the company in coming years, including a move toward electric and self-driving vehicles. It said Wednesday that this $500 million investment is in addition to that $11 billion effort. It also said the joint effort with Rivian is in addition to Ford’splans to work with Volkswagento develop a number of vehicles, including electric ones.
Related videoRivian CEO: Our electric trucks are comfortable getting dirty
Rivian has yet to start production of its electric trucks. Its first vehicle, a high-endelectric pickuptruck with planned range of more than 400 miles on a single charge, will be available in late 2020, the company says. Rivian has nevertheless attracted significant investment from manydeep-pocket investors, including a $700 million investement from Amazon(AMZN)announced in February.
And Rivian said it discussed a possible investment with a number of other top automakers before striking the deal with Ford.
Related articleAmazon invests money in electric pickups
RJ Scaringe, Rivian’s founder and CEO, would not rule out working with other automakers in the future, although he said he’s now focused on his agreements with Ford and Amazon.
The companies also did not disclose how big a stake in Rivian Ford’s investment is worth. Rivian will remain an independent company. Hinrichs will become a member of the Rivian board.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.