Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
(CNN) – Margaret Atwood’s “The Handmaid’s Tale,” a novel set in a totalitarian society, hasshot to the top of Amazon’s bestselling books list following Donald Trump’s reelection.
It saw a whopping 6,866% surge in sales,according to Amazon figures early Thursday,skyrocketing in just one day to third place from its previous ranking at 209. It currently occupies the top spot in Amazon’s literary fiction and political fiction categories and placed ninth in Barnes & Noble’s list of bestselling books.
Former president Trump clinched a victory against Vice President Kamala Harris in Tuesday’s election, securing a second term, non-consecutive after he lost in 2020.
One of the key issues of this election was reproductive rights, which posed a concern for Trump aspolls showed voters strongly favored Harris on the issue. While Trump saidhe would veto a federal abortion ban, he has sought credit for installing three conservative justices that tipped the balance of the US Supreme Court and overturned Roe v. Wade in 2022.
“The Handmaid’s Tale” takes place in a theocratic, male-dominated future America where the USConstitution is suspended, media is censored andwomen (the titular“handmaids”) are forced to bear children for the ruling class.
Many have harnessed comparisons to Atwood’s classic in the lead-up to the election, particularly around the topic of reproductive rights. When speaking on the strong turnout of women voters in early voting data, former BarackObama senior adviser Valerie Jarrett told MSNBC that “women don’t want to be in ‘The Handmaid’s Tale,” despite exit polls showingHarris’ edge among women did not exceed President Joe Biden’s in 2020 or that offormer Secretary of State Hillary Clintonin 2016.
Related article‘Handmaid’s Tale’ author has a message about Roe v. Wade
Atwood, a vocal supporter of abortion rights,took to X herself to post a political cartoonbefore the electionthat showed women dressed as handmaids lining up to vote and exchanging their uniforms for normal clothes as they exited the voting booth. After the election, sheposted: “Despair is not an option.”
It’s not the first time her book has entered the political conversation. Women donned in the handmaids’ iconic white bonnet and red robe have become staples at protests, fromBrett Kavanaugh’s Supreme Court appointmentto the aftermath of thedissolution of Roe v. Wade.
Other works of dystopian fiction have also dominated the bestseller list. Novels dealing with similar themes of oppression, such as George Orwell’s “1984” about pervasive surveillance and rigid governmental control and Ray Bradbury’s “Fahrenheit 451,” about a society in which books are banned entirely,have seen a 250% and 333% rise in Amazon sales, respectively.
The election has also boosted downloads of certain apps like Calm, a meditation app, which jumped 100 spots on the Apple App Store on election night, according to a Calm spokesperson.
Calm drew attention on social media after airing ads that gave viewers “30 seconds of silence” amid continuous election coverage.
The current number one bestselling book on both Amazon and Barnes & Noble’s lists is former first lady Melania Trump’s memoir, titled “Melania.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.