Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Thecoronationof King Charles III and Queen Camilla held in May last year cost British taxpayers £72 million ($91 million), an amount some have labeledexcessive.
The Department for Culture, Media and Sport said in itsannual accountsreleased Thursday that it had spent just over £50 million ($63 million) to coordinate the “once-in-a-generation” event, while the Home Office spent nearly £22 million ($28 million) on its policing.
Last year’s coronation was the first in the United Kingdom since Queen Elizabeth II ascended the throne in 1953.
Related articleLet them eat lobster! France spent over $500,000 on a state dinner for King Charles
“(The 2023 coronation) provided an occasion for the entire country to come together in celebration, and offered a unique opportunity to celebrate and strengthen our national identity and showcase the UK to the world,” the culture department said in its accounts, noting that the event reached an estimated audience of 2 billion people across 125 countries.
Royal fans often argue the monarchy offers good value to British taxpayers because itboosts tourismand consumer spending, particularly during big events.
But some people criticized the lavish affair — which included agold carriage processionand a display of the monarchy’s jewels — as an insensitive extravagance while millions across the country were struggling financially. At the time, Britons were still in the throes of acost-of-living crisismarked by soaring energy and grocery bills, which had started in late 2021.
“It just strikes me as unethical for the royals to spend that kind of money on a parade when children are going to school without meals,” said Graham Smith, chief executive of Republic, a group that campaigns to abolish the British monarchy.
“It was just a very big parade,” he told CNN.
The £72 million spent on the coronation could have paid for 24 million free meals for schoolchildren in London, based on the city government’scurrent budgetof £3.00 ($3.75) per meal. The meal program is intended to alleviate financial pressures on families and to ensure children do not go hungry at school.
The Royal Family also contributed to some of the costs of the event.
About £800,000 ($1 million) came from the Sovereign Grant — which is a slice of the profits of the Crown Estate, a sprawling portfolio of propertiesworth about £15.5 billion($19 billion) — according to the latestSovereign Grant Report. The estate hands the vast bulk of its profits over to the UK government each year.
Some additional spending came from the Privy Purse, the monarch’s private source of income, a royal source told CNN.
The bulk of that income is generated from a portfolio of land, property and other assets, called the Duchy of Lancaster, worth about £648 million ($811 million), according to the duchy’s﻿accountsfor the last financial year.
•Sign up to CNN’s Royal News, a weekly dispatch bringing you the inside track on the royal family, what they are up to in public and what’s happening behind palace walls.
“Plans (for the coronation) were scaled back,” the royal source told CNN. “We were very aware of the need to balance the fact that it was a historic occasion and the fact that it was taking place during difficult economic times, and so efforts were made to keep costs to a minimum.”
The carriage procession was kept deliberately shorter than Queen Elizabeth II’s and fewer guests were invited to attend the main ceremony in London’s Westminster Abbey, the source noted.
The culture department, in its accounts, said it had underspent its budget on the coronation by £2.8 million ($3.5 million).
Max Foster contributed to this article.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.