Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Amazon delivery drivers are on strike in four states across the US. Those on strike say that 400 packages, long hours and little help are part of a regular day at work.
Amazon says that the strike won’t have an impact on holiday deliveries, but the delivery drivers who went on strike are hoping it moves the needle at the massive company.
The Teamsters union, who claim torepresent less than 1% of the company’s US workforce, set up picket lines not just at the eight facilities announced to be struck, but at other Amazon distribution centers across the country as well. Those picket lines were often staffed by Teamsters employed by other companies, not from Amazon or its delivery contractors. The union said Friday that those protests had expanded to 199 facilities nationwide, although the protests did not include any work stoppage by any of the drivers making deliveries.
The drivers on strike are protesting not just for better working conditions and pay, but also for Amazon to recognize them as company employees. (The Teamsters says thousands of drivers are on strike; Amazon disputes that number and said it does not consider this a strike.)
Despite wearing Amazon vests, driving Amazon vans and delivering only Amazon packages, the company does not consider many drivers to be its employees. Rather, Amazon considers them contracted workers through independent third-party companies called “Delivery Service Partners.”
In a statement, Amazon said that it’s “incredibly proud of the DSP program.”
“We’ve empowered 4,400 entrepreneurs to build and scale their businesses, which in turn have created 390,000 driving jobs and generated $58 billion in revenue,” Kelly Nantel, a spokesperson for Amazon, said in a statement.
But the drivers say they are underpaid and overworked.
Thomas Hickman, 34, a delivery driver for Amazon in Georgia, told CNN that workdays can be grueling, often taking 12 hours to deliver hundreds of packages with limited breaks.
“The pay needs to be better. The health insurance needs to be better,” Hickman said. “We need better working conditions. If we do have 400-plus packages, we need someone to be a helper with us, to ride with us.”
Amazon disputes that drivers don’t have enough time for breaks, saying that they have at least an hour of break time throughout the day split up into two 15-minute segments and one 30-minute segment for meals. An Amazon spokesperson added that Amazon’s routing technology results in “the vast majority of drivers finishing their routes early or on time.”
Amazon said in a statement that the Teamsters do not represent anyone on the Amazon payroll.
“The Teamsters have continued to intentionally mislead the public – claiming that they represent ‘thousands of Amazon employees and drivers’. They don’t, and this is another attempt to push a false narrative,” said Kelly Nantel, a spokesperson for Amazon.
Hickman, who has been delivering packages for Amazon for four months, said he was excited about the job and wants to enjoy working as a driver. But the excessive deliveries, emphasis on speed and lack of assistance have worn on him to the point where he injured his ankle and leg while on the job.
“It’s been wear and tear on my body,” Hickman said. “It’s been wear and tear on everybody’s body.”
However, the company told CNN that the independent contractors who have the delivery contracts are responsible for the working conditions of the drivers, and that drivers’ safety is a major concern in deliveries.
“The safety of employees and drivers are our top priority, and no driver is ever expected to make a delivery if they feel unsafe or feel unwell,” the company told CNN.
Samantha Thomas, a delivery driver for Amazon for seven months, told CNN that she enjoys delivering packages and meeting people on her routes. Yet, she said, Amazon needs to do more to support its workers.
“We want for the company to care about us more, so that we can care more about the job we’re doing and show up better for this job,” Thomas said.
Ash’shura Brooks, 29, began working as a delivery driver at an Amazon warehouse in Skokie, Illinois, in October 2023.
Brooks, who has a 7-year-old son, said the job put pressure on her to deliver packages quickly while dealing with long hours and a lack of safety guardrails.
For example, she cited one day when she was sent out on a delivery route despite freezing temperatures. Brooks said there was no leniency with the job, contributing to stress.
“You either sacrifice your safety in order to get things done faster, or you sacrifice your job in order to do things more safely,” she said.
Brooks said she hopes people who are eager to receive packages for Christmas and Hanukkah can empathize with the drivers’ demands — but primarily, she said she hopes Jeff Bezos, the executive chairman of Amazon, listens to the workers.
“It is a shame that America, as a society, has come to the place of, ‘We are putting packages and profit over people,’” Brooks said.
“These are the same people that are delivering your packages to your customers, and you care too much about the profit that you are not listening to the people who are working for you,” Brooks added. “And that needs to change.”
The Teamsters union cites Amazon’s $2 trillion market value as evidence that the company has more than enough resources to support its workers. Amazon reported a net income of $39.2 billion in the first nine months of this year, more than double for the same period in 2023.
“The fact of the matter is they make trillions of dollars, and they’re not able to pay us for the work that we do,” Hickman said.
The debate over the employer-employee relationship has proved fraught in recent years, with legal battles over whether Amazon is considered the drivers’ employer, responsible for better wages and benefits.
Trenton Knight, a delivery driver in Georgia who has driven for Amazon for five months, told CNN that drivers feel neglected because their work-life balance is not respected. He said it is difficult to get a shift, but once assigned, the route often takes the entire day. He said he is striking for better benefits and wages, and for him and his fellow drivers to be recognized as Amazon workers.
“If we weren’t their workers, we wouldn’t be driving their trucks, we wouldn’t be wearing their gear, we wouldn’t be delivering their packages,” Knight said.
This story has been updated with additional context and developments.
CNN’s Jaide Timm-Garcia, Isabel Rosales and Chris Isidore contributed to reporting.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.