Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
President-elect Donald Trump doubled down on his tariff threats Thursday night, pledging to raise tariffs on European Union nations unless they increase their purchases of American oil and gas to narrow the trade gap with the United States.
“I told the European Union that they must make up their tremendous deficit with the United States by the large scale purchase of our oil and gas. Otherwise, it is TARIFFS all the way!!!” Trumppostedon Truth Social, which is owned by his media company.
Trump has continued to use the threat of tariffs as a negotiating tactic with countries he believes are treating the United States unfairly. In November, Trump threatened a massive 25% across-the-board tariff on all imported goods from Canada and Mexico unless those countries tighten up what he viewed as lax drug and border enforcement.
The specter of higher tariffs, or even a trade war, also adds to the confusion and uncertainty facing business leaders in the United States and overseas. Some experts have warned that even the threat of tariffs can cost business investment and jobs, not to mention hit share prices.
On the campaign trail, Trump routinely said he would work to ramp up America’s fossil fuel production — even though the United States produces more oil than any nation in history. He has promised to loosen regulations on new drilling and fracking, and his message that Europe must buy more energy from America is consistent with his pledges.
But the United States is already the largest supplier of liquefied natural gas to Europe, according to theUS Energy Information Administration. Europe has largely weaned itself off Russian natural gas during the ongoing war with Ukraine, making large-scale purchases of gas from America to make up for some of the difference.
Still, Europe exports far more goods to the United States than it imports from America. Although trade gaps are common — Americans don’t demand as many European goods as they do goods from China, Canada and Mexico — Trump has consistently lashed out against trade gaps as evidence of unfair trade practices.
European stocks fell sharply Friday, and US stocks were slightly lower in premarket trading. Trump’s tariff threat adds more uncertainty into a market that is already weary of stalled-out progress on inflation. Higher tariffs could reignite a global inflation crisis, economists have predicted.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.