•An adult and toddlerhave diedafter a car plowed into a crowdat a Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany, said Reiner Haseloff, the regional prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt. At least 15 people have serious injuries and68 people in all were hurt, authorities said.
• The suspected driver in the attack, who is believed to haveacted alone, has been arrested, according to Haseloff. The suspect is a 50-year-old man anda doctor from Saudi Arabiawho works in Saxony-Anhalt, officials said.
• Magdeburg is the capital of Saxony-Anhalt and is about 100 miles west of Berlin.
Our live coverage of the attack on a German Christmas market has ended for the day. Followthe latest updatesor read through the posts below.
The man suspected of driving into a crowd at a Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany, rented the car that was used to plow people down, Saxony-Anhalt’s Prime Minister Reiner Haseloff said, according to local public broadcaster MDR.
The White House is closely monitoring the situation in Germany after a driver fatally plowed his car into a crowd at a Christmas market, a National Security Council official told CNN.
US officials are in touch with their German counterparts who are investigating the situation to offer support.
“Our condolences go out to the victims and their families, and our thoughts are with the German people during this difficult time,” the official told CNN.
It remains unclear whether President Joe Biden, who has been in touch with Democratic lawmakers as they strategized to avert a US government shutdown, has been personally briefed on the situation.
Saudi Arabia’s foreign ministry has condemned Friday’s attack in a German Christmas market.
German authorities previously reported that the suspected attacker is from Saudi Arabia.
The ministry shared Saudi Arabia’s “condemnation” of the attack in a statement posted to social media, expressing “its solidarity with the German people and the families of the victims.”
“The Kingdom affirms its position in rejecting violence and expresses its sympathy and sincere condolences to the families of the deceased and to the Federal Republic of Germany, government and people, with its wishes for a speedy recovery for the injured,” the statement said.

A Christmas market in Halle, a city close to Magdeburg where Friday’s attack took place, is remaining open — but with more security, local public broadcaster MDR has reported.
The number of security staff will be increased and roads will be secured, MDR reported.
The Halle market will also not play music in solidarity with the city Magdeburg, the outlet said.
No explosive device has been found in the car of the man suspected to have plowed into a crowd at a German Christmas market, local public broadcaster MDR has reported, citing Magdeburg police.
The area around the car had previously been cordoned off as police suspected that an explosive device could be inside it, MDR reported.
Anadult and a toddlerwere killed at a Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany, when a car plowed into the crowd Friday evening. At least 15 people have serious injuries and68 people in all were hurt, authorities said.
Magdeburg is the capital of Saxony-Anhalt and is about 100 miles west of Berlin.
German Interior Minister Nancy Faeser said security authorities areworking to clarify detailssurrounding the attack.
Here’s what we know:
Suspect:The suspected driver,who has been arrested, is a50-year-old manfrom Saudi Arabia with a permanent residency permit, the Saxony-Anhalt region’s Interior Minister Tamara Zieschang said Friday. He is a doctor who works in the state and has beenliving in Germany since 2006, according to Reiner Haseloff, the regional prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt. Preliminary information suggests heacted alone, Haseloff added.
On the scene:Victimswho have minor injuriesfrom the attack are being treated in a nearby shopping center, local public broadcaster MDR has reported. Around100 firefighters and 50 rescue personnelhave been deployed to the scene, according to a statement posted on the city of Magdeburg’s Facebook page. Local police suspectthere could be an explosive device in the vehiclethat plowed through the Christmas market, according to local public broadcaster MDR. The Magdeburg police have cordoned off the entire site due to the possibility of explosives, the local broadcaster reported.
Leaders respond:German Chancellor Olaf Scholzwill travel to Magdeburgon Saturday, Haseloff said. In a statement Friday, Scholz said that his thoughts are with the victims after a car plowed into a Christmas market in Magdeburg. The presidents of France and the European Councilalso sent their condolences to victims.
The number of injured people from the German Christmas market attack has exceeded the capacity available in the hospitals in Magdeburg, local public broadcaster MDR has reported.
Therefore, some of the victims are being flown to a hospital in the nearby city of Halle, MDR reported.
Remember:At least 15 people have serious injuries and68 people in all were hurt, authorities said.
Emergency services expect to be at the scene all night, according to a MDR reporter on the scene.
Victims who have minor injuries from the German Christmas market attack are being treated in a nearby shopping center, local public broadcaster MDR has reported.
A tram has also been converted to care for victims with minor injuries in Magdeburg, MDR reporters on the ground said.
Those with more serious injuries are being treated in surrounding hospitals, emergency services said.
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz will travel to Magdeburg on Saturday, said Reiner Haseloff, the regional prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt.
Earlier on Friday, Scholz said that his thoughts were with the victims of the Christmas market attack and thanked rescue workers who were at the scene.
The suspect in the German Christmas market attack is a 50-year-old man with a permanent residency permit, the Saxony-Anhalt region’s Interior Minister Tamara Zieschang said Friday.
Authorities previously saidthat the man is a doctor from Saudi Arabia who had lived in Germany since 2006.
European leaders have sent their condolences after at least two people were killed at a German Christmas market when a car plowed into the crowd on Friday.
António Costa:The president of the European Council said he was “appalled by the horrific news from Magdeburg,” adding that “the EU stands in solidarity with Germany.”
Emmanuel Macron:The French president wrote on X that he was “profoundly shocked” by the attack. “France shares the pain of the German people and expresses its full solidarity.”
Dick Schoof: The Dutch prime minister said “the Netherlands stands shoulder to shoulder with our German neighbors in these dark moments.”
The suspected driver in the German Christmas market attack acted alone, according to preliminary information, Reiner Haseloff, the regional prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt, said Friday.
“We are currently in the process of compiling all further data and also carrying out the interrogation. According to the current information, it is an individual perpetrator, so there is no longer any danger to the city because we were able to arrest him,” Haseloff said in televised remarks on Friday night.

The suspected driver in the German Christmas market attack is a doctor from Saudi Arabia who works in Saxony-Anhalt, according to Reiner Haseloff, the regional prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt.
The suspect has been living in Germany since 2006, Haseloff said in a televised statement.
He added that at least two people have died, MDR reported.
An adult and a toddler were killed in the Magdeburg Christmas market attack, according to Reiner Haseloff, the regional prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt.
At least two people have died in the Magdeburg Christmas market attack, local public broadcaster MDR reported late Friday.
The broadcaster was citing the prime minister of Saxony-Anhalt, Reiner Haseloff.
At least 15 people have serious injuries after an attack at a Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany, the city said.
At total of 68 people were injured in the incident, according to a statement posted on the city of Magdeburg’s Facebook page.
At least 37 people are moderately injured and another 16 are slightly injured after a car rammed into people at the market, the post said citing emergency services.
Around 100 firefighters and 50 rescue personnel have been deployed, the statement said.
German Interior Minister Nancy Faeser said security authorities are working to clarify details surrounding the attack at the Magdeburg Christmas market.
“This news from #Magdeburg is deeply shocking. The emergency services are doing everything they can to care for the injured and save lives. All our thoughts are with the victims and their families. The security authorities will shed light on the background,” Faeser said in a post on X on Friday.

Local police suspect there could be an explosive device in the vehicle that plowed through the Christmas market, according to local public broadcaster MDR.
The Magdeburg police have cordoned off the entire site due to the possibility of explosives, the local broadcaster reported.
The Magdeburg Christmas market incident was an “attack,” according to local emergency services.
Local fire and emergency services previously told CNN about 60 to 80 people are injured. One person has died, police said, according to local public broadcaster MDR.
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz in a statement Friday said that his thoughts are with the victims after a car plowed into a Christmas market in Magdeburg.
“My thoughts are with the victims and their families. We are at their side and at the side of the people of Magdeburg. My thanks go to the dedicated rescue workers in these anxious hours,” Scholz said.

At least one person has died, according to local public broadcaster MDR. About 60 to 80 people are injured, local fire and emergency services told CNN.
About 60 to 80 people are injured after a car plowed into a German Christmas market in Magdeburg, local fire and emergency services told CNN.
At least one person has died in the incident, police have said, according to local public broadcaster MDR.
The driver of the car that plowed into a crowd at a Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany, has been arrested, according to local public broadcaster MDR.
The incident was a “terrible event, especially now in the days before Christmas,” the Prime Minister of Saxony-Anhalt Reiner Haseloff said, according to MDR.
Madgeburg is the capital of Saxony-Anhalt and is about 100 miles west of Berlin.
Footage from social media verified by CNN shows the moment a black car drove directly into a crowd of people at a busy Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany.
In the video, dozens of people crowd the market stalls. The car plows directly into them. Others run away from the car in panic, some diving into the stalls.
Bodies and debris are scattered across the narrow lane as the car turns out of the plaza.
Saxony-Anhalt’s Prime Minister Reiner Haseloff is on his way to Magdeburg after a car drove into a crowd at a Christmas market, local public broadcaster MDR reported Friday.
Magdeburg is the capital of the state of Saxony-Anhalt.
At least one person has died after a car plowed into a crowd at a Christmas market in Magdeburg, Germany, police have said, according to local public broadcaster MDR.
Several people have also been injured, MDR reported, citing police.
Extensive police measures are currently in place at the scene, Magdeburg police said in a post on X.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.