•The Senate passed astopgap funding billto avert a federal government shutdown shortly after the midnight funding deadline. The House passed the plan earlier this evening after two prior attempts failed this week. President Joe Biden hasindicated he will sign the legislationif approved in the upper chamber.
•What’s in the deal:The latest plan wouldextend government funding into Marchand includes disaster relief and farming provisions, but does not include asuspension of the debt limit, which President-elect Donald Trump has been demanding that Republicans address.
•How we got here:This was “Plan C” for GOP lawmakers. Trumptorpedoed a bipartisan dealearlier this week, and then a Trump-backed plan that would have suspended the debt limitalso failedin the House on Thursday. Democrats are painting funding the government without touching the debt ceiling as awin for the party.
Our live coverage of the Trump administration’s transition has ended for the day. Followthe latest updatesor read through the posts below.
The Senate voted to pass astopgap funding bill, clearing the way for President Joe Biden to sign the measure into law.
The Senate passed the bill not long after midnight — technically after the funding deadline, but nevertheless averting a shutdown that would have had widespread impacts. The vote was 85 to 11.
The bill can now be sent to Biden to besigned into law. The House passed the bill Friday evening.
The legislation extends government funding into March and provides disaster relief and farm aid, but does not include a suspension of thedebt limit, which President-elect Donald Trump had demanded Republicans address.
The Senate has taken up thestopgap spending bill passed by the House, and is now holding a vote on the proposal after missing the midnight deadline to avoid a government shutdown. The spending bill would fund the federal government through March.
The spending bill includes disaster relief and farming provisions, but does not include asuspension of the debt limit, which President-elect Donald Trump has been demanding Republicans address.
This is “Plan C,” after Trump and close allies sank an initial bipartisan bid earlier this week, and then a Trump-backed plan failed in the House on Thursday.
The Office of Management and Budget is not shutting down the federal government as the Senate is close to passing the funding bill, according to the White House.
“OMB has ceased shutdown preparations because there is a high degree of confidence that Congress will imminently pass the relevant appropriations and the President will sign the bill on Saturday,” the White House said in a statement. “Because obligations of federal funds are incurred and tracked on a daily basis, agencies will not shut down and may continue their normal operations.”

The Senate passed the Social Security Fairness Act tonight, 76-20, restoring and increasing Social Security benefits for some public workers.
The bill had previously passed the House on November 12 and now heads to the president’s desk.
The midnight deadline has lapsed to avert a government shutdown, but if the Senate passes the bill that the House approved earlier, a closure will likely cause little disruption.
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer announced Friday night that senators have reached an agreement to vote on the stop gap funding bill before midnight. If passed as it is expected to, Congress will prevent a shutdown of the federal government.
“I have very good news for my colleagues and the country. Democrats and Republicans have reached, just reached an agreement that will allow us to pass the CR tonight, before the midnight deadline,” Schumer said on the Senate floor.

Exiting the floor, the New York Democrat said: “It’s looking good.”
“We’re feeling very good. Good bipartisan compromise, no shutdown, no debt ceiling and a lot of money for people in need, because of — you know, because of disasters,” Schumer said.
Incoming Senate Majority Leader John Thune responded to the debt limit not making it into the House-passed stop gap funding package, despite President-elect Donald Trump’s insistence that it be included.
“The vote last night is what it is. I mean, that’s where the House came down,” Thune said. “We’ve got to deal with the debt limit, and now it just punts it into next year”

Thune told reporters that he has not spoken to Trump tonight. When asked about Trump’s disappointment about the debt limit being left out of the bill, Thune ignored the question and walked inside his office.
Just before the House voted Friday night, President-elect Donald Trump lamented to one GOP lawmaker that he was ultimately disappointed the spending deal couldn’t include a hike in the debt ceiling, an issue that he knows now he will have to confront in his presidency.
The source familiar with the call told CNN that Trump seemed frustrated yet resigned as reality began setting in for the president-elect that despite his massive influence over the GOP, there are some issues that some conservatives will not bend on for him.
Those close to Trump warned he could be blamed for funding lapsing in the weeks before his inauguration if the government shutdown, but the source said that while the incoming president seemed resigned, he was not enthusiastic about the outcome. Trump ultimately got to that place after conversations with allies and lawmakers, many of whom stressed over the last 12 hours that there was no way to get what he wanted and also avoid a shutdown, sources told CNN.
Tonight, the Senate unanimously passed the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act 2.0, which reauthorizes a pediatric cancer research initiative through the National Institutes of Health (NIH) into 2028.
This provision had originally been part of the stop gap funding deal negotiated by Congressional leadership, but it was dropped after President-elect Donald Trump insisted on a “clean” short term spending package, without extra measures included.
Earlier this week, House Republicans pushed back on outrage over the funding being cut from the package, arguing that Senate Democrats were to blame for waiting months to bring up the bill. The House had passed the research funding reauthorization on March 5.
The research initiative is named after Gabriella Miller, a Virginia resident who had an inoperable brain tumor and died in 2013 at the age of 10. The following year, former President Barack Obama signed into lawthe Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act, which authorized $12.6 million in annual funds for childhood disease research through fiscal year 2023.
Ellyn Miller, Gabriella’s mother, told CNN Friday night after the bill was passed that she felt “elation, for not just for myself and my family, and in honor of my daughter, but for the entire childhood cancer world. This means so much to all of us.”
House Republicans who opposed the spending bill that passed on Friday criticized House Speaker Mike Johnson’s handling of the process, casting doubt on how smooth his path to being reelected to his position in January will be.
Rep. Keith Self of Texas said he wants Congress to pass simple funding bills, explaining, “it’s the only way to govern.” He said he had no comment on whether he’ll back Johnson next year.
Rep. Chip Roy, wo has repeatedly opposed the spending levels in proposals put forth by Johnson, conceded that Republicans “ended up getting the framework for actual spending cuts in a significant way” in the latest bill.
When asked if he thinks Johnson’s chances of being elected speaker have been compromised, Roy said he’s “not gonna go down that road,” adding, “we’ve got through tonight.”
“We managed to, I think, deliver something that was useful and productive and provides a framework for, you know, productivity in January. So we got to figure out how to organize to get that done,” The Texas Republican said, adding that “we could have delivered this product three days ago.”
Rep. Byron Donalds of Florida told CNN he voted for the bill in the interest of disaster aid for his state, but noted it “could have been more streamlined,” adding “at the end of the day, this place is never easy. I mean, the speaker’s doing the best he can.”
“At the beginning of this Congress, you know, we were having a large disagreement amongst our colleagues about how this place was going to work, and for the end of this Congress to kind of get back into that same old way in Washington, I’m definitely not a fan of but, you know, we’re going to move forward,” Donalds said.

Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer assured reporters on Friday night that the Senate is working on a plan to pass the stop gap funding package.
“We’re working through the amendment process right now,” the New York Democrat told CNN. “That’s where I’m going, to work through the amendment process right now.”
Asked about his outlook on the debt ceiling next year, Schumer wouldn’t say if he agrees with Democrats who say they should only engage if Trump agrees to abolish it.
“Look, I think that the bottom line is that this would have been very unfortunate time to add the debt limit to any agreement to any CR (continuing resolution) and I’m very glad we didn’t,” Schumer said.
Schumer said he was glad Republican leadership and members “were able to tell Elon Musk he was wrong when it comes to debt.” He refused to comment when pressed on whether Trump is taking too much direction from Musk, who’s influence led House Republicans to scrap an initial Bipartisan deal earlier this week.
While Democrats didn’t get everything they wanted, Schumer said it was important to get disaster relief through the finish line and prevent a government shutdown.
“We kept the government open, and we didn’t get the debt ceiling. So, there were three major victories. We didn’t get everything we wanted, but I think if you look at the vote in the House, people felt pretty good. It was virtually unanimous,” Schumer said.
Majority Leader Chuck Schumer says he is “confident” the Senate will pass thestopgap spending billto prevent a federal government shutdown.
“The House has overwhelmingly passed a bill to keep the government open and I’m confident the Senate will pass it as well. We hope to get it passed as soon as possible,” the New York Democrat wrote in a post on X.
“Though this bill does not include everything Democrats fought for, there are major victories in this bill for American families—provide emergency aid for communities battered by natural disasters, no debt ceiling, and it will keep the government open with no draconian cuts. As I have said, the only way to keep the government open is through bipartisanship.”

Some context:Schumer is alluding to efforts by President-elect Donald Trump, whotorpedoed an initial bipartisan funding deal, to inject the politically fraught issue of the debt ceiling into funding negotiations.
A Trump-backed measure that would have suspended the debt limit before he takes office in Januaryfailed in the House on Thursday, leaving Democrats with “Plan C”: the bill headed to the Senate for a vote tonight.
Throughout the government funding negotiating process, particularly when lawmakers reached an impasse, House Speaker Mike Johnson returned to a similar joke: He welcomed anyone else who could get 218 votes.
It takes 218 votes to establish a majority in the lower chamber — and to hold on to the speakership — when every member casts a ballot.
“He said that a lot. He does crack that joke quite a bit,” GOP Rep. David Valadao, a key House appropriator who was at the negotiating table, told CNN.

“In reality, I think we all know that getting to 218 in this conference today is not an easy task for anyone,” Valadao added. “These past two years have been a little bit of a roller coaster, and we expect that to continue.”
Some background:Many lawmakers left for the holidays frustrated at Johnson for leaving them in the dark for much of this process, or for how he created a lot of angst by pivoting his government funding plan at the last minute, only to revert back to essentially his original position.
But most Republicans are hoping that time away for the holidays will ease the tensions of the real divisions that exist within the narrow House Republican majority. And very few actually are ready to oust Johnson.
For now, Johnson has something in his back pocket that has been his human shield: the support of President-elect Donald Trump.
“President Trump says he’s supporting him, and I’m supporting him,” Republican Rep. Mike Collins said.
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries said Democrats have “successfully funded the government” and fought for Americans after the chamber passed a spending package to avoid a shutdown on Friday.
The House passed a bill to keep the government funded into March with support from Democrats. Before the vote, CNN reported that Jeffries signaled to his Democratic members that he will not instruct the party to oppose the GOP bill, despite some objections.
Speaking to reporters shortly after the bill’s passage, Jeffries touted several provisions in the bill, including a bipartisan disaster aid package and money for child care.
“House Democrats have successfully stopped extreme MAGA Republicans form shutting down the government, crashing the economy and hurting working class Americans all across the land,” Jeffries said.

He also praised Democrats for preventing adebt limit hike, saying his party “stopped the billionaire boys club, which wanted a $4 trillion blank check by suspending the debt ceiling.”
The issue of the debt ceiling was not included in this bill after President-elect Donald Trump and allies, including tech billionaire Elon Musk, demanded it be added to negotiations on Thursday.
“This is a victory for the American people,” the minority leader said Friday, adding that there are still things to fight for in the new year, when theGOP will take control of both chambers.
House Speaker Mike Johnson said he was in “constant contact” with President-elect Donald Trump throughout the process ofnegotiating a new stopgap funding billin time to prevent a government shutdown.
Trump’s opposition to Johnson’s initial plan earlier this week prompted House Republicans to scrap it.
“He knew exactly what we were doing and why … and this is a good outcome for the country. I think he certainly is happy about this outcome as well,” Johnson said, noting that he had spoken to Trump about 45 minutes before addressing reporters following the successful vote in the House.

Johnson also noted that he spoke to Elon Musk — the tech billionaire whoseinfluence helped tank the initial bipartisan deal— “about the extraordinary challenges of the job.”
“And I said, ‘Hey, you want to be Speaker of the House? I don’t know,’” Johnson said. “He said, ‘This may be the hardest job in the world.’”
House Speaker Mike Johnson said things are going to be “very different around here” when Republicans take control of both chambers of Congress in January, while applauding thepassage of a stopgap spending billon Friday.
The House passed a bill to keep the government funded into March. The bill, which also includes disaster relief and farming provisions, will now go to the Senate.
Johnson called it a “very important piece of legislation,” but also a “necessary step to bridge the gap to put us into that moment where we can put our fingerprints on the final decisions on spending for 2025.”
“We are set up for a big and important new start in January,” Johnson said.
Johnson had to come up with a new deal after President-elect Donald Trump demanded on Thursday that a suspension of the debt limit be included in the bill — which failed last night. This bill that passed the House on Friday does not address the debt limit.
“We’re grateful that everyone stood together to do the right thing,” he said, urging swift passage in the Senate.
The House has voted topass a stopgap funding billjust hours before a midnight deadline to avert a federal government shutdown. The Senate must next take up the bill.
The vote was 366 to 34. Thirty-four Republicans voted against the bill, and one Democrat voted present.
The bill would extend government funding into March and includes disaster relief and farming provisions, but does not include asuspension of the debt limit, which President-elect Donald Trump has been demanding Republicans address.
White House press secretary Karine Jean Pierre offered qualified praise for a proposal from House Republicans to fund the government and avoid a government shutdown, writing in a statement Friday, “President Biden supports moving this legislation forward and ensuring that the vital services the government provides for hardworking Americans.”
“A government shutdown heading into the holidays would mean service members and air traffic controllers go to work without pay, essential government services for hardworking Americans would be paused, and economic disruption would occur,” Jean-Pierre wrote. “While it does not include everything we sought, it includes disaster relief that the President requested for the communities recovering from the storm, eliminates the accelerated pathway to a tax cut for billionaires, and would ensure that the government can continue to operate at full capacity.”

The White House has blasted Republicans, including President-elect Donald Trump, Vice President-elect JD Vance, and billionaire Elon Musk forblowing up a bipartisan funding deal earlier this week, with Jean-Pierre saying GOP lawmakers were “doing the bidding of their billionaire benefactors,” by reneging on their agreement with Democrats.
Biden himself has yet to weigh in on the fight to fund the government — during Friday’s press briefing, Jean-Pierre defended Biden’s silence on the issue, telling CNN, “This is a strategy that we have done many times before, not the first time, and this is for Republicans in Congress in the House specifically to fix. They created this mess.﻿”
Tech billionaire and Donald Trump confidante Elon Musk — whose influenceplayed a role in tanking an initial bipartisan funding billthis week — offered some praise for Johnson’s “Plan C” tonight, after aplan backed by the president-electalso failed Thursday.
“The Speaker did a good job here, given the circumstances. It went from a bill that weighed pounds to a bill that weighed ounces. Ball should now be in the Dem court,” Musk wrote in apost on X.

The House is voting now on astopgap funding billin a bid to avert a federal government shutdown just hours before a midnight deadline. If the bill passes, it would next need to go to the Senate.
The bill would extend government funding into March. It includes disaster relief and farming provisions, but does not include asuspension of the debt limit, which President-elect Donald Trump has been demanding Republicans address.
How we got here:Republicans have struggled to find a way to prevent the government from shutting down after Trump upended the funding push by coming out against an initial bipartisan deal earlier this week.
The Republican-led chamber thentried and failed to pass a GOP funding planbacked by Trump that would have included a two-year suspension of the debt limit.
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries said now that the debt ceiling suspension is out of the government funding bill text, Democrats can “evaluate the four corners of what remains.”
“I’m looking forward to our caucus-wide conversation,” Jeffries said, trailed by reporters.

“What needed to come out of the bill has come out of the bill and now we’ve got to evaluate the four corners of what remains in the legislation,” Jeffries said.

House Republicans pointed fingers within their party as they emerged from a 2-hour meeting to discuss a last-ditch plan to fund the government ahead of the midnight shutdown deadline.
Here’s what some of them said:
The House is expected to take one vote on a plan to avert a government shutdown sometime between 5 and 6 p.m. ET. Members were just alerted of vote timing.
It is unclear if the vote will pass.
House Democrats will meet to caucus before the vote, according to multiple Democratic sources.
Remember:Members of Congress have been scrambling since President-elect Donald Trumptorpedoed an original bipartisan spending dealearlier this week. Then aTrump-backed GOP planfailed a vote yesterday.
Lawmakers have mere hours left before a midnight deadline to strike a deal and keep the government open.
The latest effort would see the GOP move a spending package, disaster aid, farm aid and the extension of the farm bill in one package under suspension of the rules, which would require a two-thirds majority vote to pass, according to three members familiar with the plan.
House Speaker Mike Johnson hastold reporters there won’t be a government shutdown, but has not detailed the plan.
CNN’s Sarah Ferris contributed reporting to this post.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell called for his colleagues to recognize the need for bipartisan deal-making in his farewell speech as GOP leader, which ended with multiple standing ovations from colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
McConnell pointed to the chaos in the Capitol Friday, as Congress works to avert a shutdown, as evidence that it is important to try to find compromise.
“Folks come to Washington to do one of two things: either to make a point, or to make a difference,” he said. “It’s usually not that hard to tell who’s doing which, especially in situations like the one we’re in right now.”

“The people who are here to make a difference recognize pretty quickly you never get everything you want, but often you can get quite a lot. And the folks who prefer to make a point have a funny habit of reminding us, out loud, how poorly they understand that fact,” McConnell added.
“I don’t care to count how many times I’ve reminded our colleagues and our House counterparts how harmful it is to shut the government down, and how foolish it is to bet your own side won’t take the blame. When you try to use normal government function as a bargaining chip, you pay a political price.”
Once House Speaker Mike Johnson and House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries speak about thenew GOP plan to avert a federal government shutdown, Jeffries is expected to hold a Democratic caucus-wide meeting before indicating how they will vote on the floor, per multiple members.
Timing for the caucus meeting is in flux.
A group of battleground Democrats told their party’s leadership they would vote together as a party and ensure their side was not cut out of the deal, according to multiple Democratic sources.
The group of lawmakers met with Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, Minority Whip Katheleen Clark and Caucus Chair Pete Aguilar this afternoon, the sources said.
Rep. Marcy Kaptur of Ohio described a feeling of unity in the meeting despite the rapidly approaching shutdown.
“We are together as a team, and that we have to wait to see whether the other side brings back the agreement in the first place,” Kaptur told CNN.

Still, Kaptur did not rule out voting for the GOP’s emerging plan, including a slimmed-down version of the stopgap bill House Speaker Mike Johnson and Jeffries negotiated.
“I would consider it. But I would have to read very word because there are tricks being played,” Kaptur said.
House Republicans are preparing to move a spending package, disaster aid, farm aid and the extension of the farm bill in one package under suspension of the rules, which would require a two-thirds majority, according to three members.
“I think the reality is you’ve got to get this passed as quickly as possible,” New York GOP Rep. Mike Lawler said.
There is a major caveat though. House Speaker Mike Johnson still needs to talk to President-elect Donald Trump about it, members say.
It’s also not clear if Democrats will vote with Republicans on such a package, but Speaker Johnson and House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries have been communicating this morning.
House Speaker Mike Johnson told reporters that there won’t be a government shutdown, but did not detail specifics of a plan.
Still, he asserted that Republicans are united.
“There is a unanimous agreement in the room that we need to move forward. I will not telegraph to you the specific details of that yet because I’ve got a couple of things I’ve got to wrap up in a few moments upstairs, but I expect that we will be proceeding forward. We will not have a government shutdown, and we will meet our obligations for our farmers who need aid, for the disaster victims all over the country and for making sure that military and essential services and everyone who relies on the federal government for a paycheck is paid over the holidays. I’ll give you more details here in just a moment,” Johnson said.

Audiences at a conservative gathering in Phoenix, Arizona, on Friday continued to express displeasure with House Speaker Mike Johnson.
Attendees booed Johnson when prompted by an anti-vaccine activist, who was criticizing thebipartisan government funding billthe speaker helped negotiate before it collapsed this week at the direction of President-elect Donald Trump.
During Turning Point USA’s “AmericaFest” conference, Leigh-Allyn Baker, an actress and outspoken opponent of vaccines, falsely suggested the failed spending bill had included language mandating vaccines and other public health measures, and attacked Johnson for his role in negotiating the bill.
“I mean, as his employer, what do we think about that?” Baker asked the crowd, prompting loud boos. “So I just want to let you know if you’re listening, supreme leader Johnson, that I for one am not doing that.”

Why it matters:The collapse of the original bipartisan funding agreement on Wednesday thrust Johnson’sfuture as leader of the chamber into question, and sent the country hurtling toward a government shutdown if not averted before midnight.
During the first two days of AmericaFest, Johnson has been the subject of consistent ridicule by Trump allies. Former Trump aide Steve Bannon said Thursday that Johnson should be removed from the speakership.
Johnson was scheduled to appear at the conference but canceled his appearance to work on the negotiations for a new funding bill.
Republican Rep. Dusty Johnson, a close ally of GOP leaders, downplayed the likelihood of a prolonged government shutdown but also made clear there was no firm consensus on a path forward during a GOP conference meeting on Friday afternoon.
“I just said, there are shutdowns and there are shutdowns. I mean, a 10-day shutdown is obviously very different than a 10-minute shutdown,” he told CNN.

Johnson had just suggested that Congress could be heading toward a “technical shutdown,” that could last a “few hours,” but stressed leadership wanted to avoid a prolonged lapse.
Asked if it’s likely the House will not pass a bill by midnight, Johnson said Speaker Mike Johnson is “laying out some options,” then “you’ve got a lot of different people would need to sign off on a play call.
Johnson also said he would have a “better sense for whether or not a consensus is developing” after he returned to the room with his colleagues.
“I have been really impressed with how Mike Johnson has tried to take all of these disparate voices, people who agree on, frankly, not very much, and trying to channel them together for something productive,” he said.
House GOP leaders still have not yet settled on a way forward, according to multiple members in a closed-door meeting.
House Majority Leader Steve Scalise told CNN that there are “no decisions” on when to vote.
House Republican leadership is proposing a plan forraising the debt limitthat is separate from the government funding bill, according to three sources in a closed-door GOP meeting Friday.
The proposal would be an agreement to raise the debt limit by $1.5 trillion next year in the “first reconciliation package” alongside $2.5 trillion cuts in “net mandatory spending in the reconciliation process,” according to three sources.
This plan of separating the debt limit increase from the government funding plan, as CNN has been reporting, is being discussed in a House GOP conference meeting that is still underway. The debt limit proposal would satisfy most of the Republicans who are against raising the debt ceiling without extensive cuts accompanying it.
House GOP leadership is shopping this idea to the conference to see if they have enough consensus to go to the floor and avoid another failure like Thursday night, when38 Republicans voted against a planthat linked government funding and the debt limit together — a plan that President-elect Donald Trump had supported.
Remember:It was Trump who injected the controversial debt limit issue into the current spending negotiations in the first place. He has said he wants the ceiling addressed — and a government shutdown, if necessary — while President Joe Biden is still in office, not during his own presidency.
Trumptanked an emerging bipartisan dealthat would have averted a shutdown but did not address the debt limit earlier this week.
With just hours left to avoid a government shutdown, one business owner in North Carolina said thedisaster aidincluded in the potential funding plan is a critical need for her community.
North Carolina, and several other southeast states, were hit hard byHurricane Heleneearlier this year.
Katie Button owns two restaurants in Asheville, one of which is still closed after Helene devastated the area. She said the looming shutdown with aid hanging in the balance is“incredibly frustrating and disheartening.”
“We desperately need this disaster relief bill go though,” she said. “Basically, we’re hanging on by a thread and it feels kind of ridiculous to feel like you’re caught up in the crossfire of some kind of political showdown.”

She said western North Carolina needs President-elect Donald Trump and elected officials to “come together, put their party designation aside, and get this money passed.”
Button said the money is needed not only to re-build and clean up, but also to support the small businesses so they don’t have to permanently close their doors.
“There are real people, workers in our area, businesses, that are at risk if this does not get passed,” Button said.
Watch Button’s interview below:
The federal government could shut down in a matter of hours if Congress does not cobble together a temporary funding plan on Friday.
Here’s what Americans could soon face if Congress doesn’t reach a deal by midnight on Friday:
Agencies could shut down:﻿Since Congress has not approved appropriations for any agencies, all would be affected. Every department and agency has its own set of plans and procedures for a shutdown, which last occurred during Trump’s first term and stretched from just before Christmas in 2018 to the end of January in 2019. The plans include how many employees would be furloughed, which employees are considered essential and would work without pay, how long it would take to wind down operations in the hours before a shutdown and which activities would come to a halt. Those plans can vary from shutdown to shutdown.
Potential impact on holiday travel:A shutdown could have an outsized impact on air travel since it would coincide with the busy holiday season. Roughly 59,000 of the agency’s more than 62,000 employees are considered essential and would continue working without pay during a shutdown, TSA Administrator David Pekoske posted on X on Thursday. However, during the 2019 shutdown, hundreds of TSA officers called out from work – many of them to find other ways to make money. So did many air traffic controllers, snarling flights.
National Parks:Should a funding lapse occur, routine visitor services would be available through Sunday, the National Parks Service said. The agency is still reviewing its contingency plan to determine operations for individual parks. However, some states could use their own funds to keep the national parks within their borders open. When a shutdown loomed in the fall of 2023, Utah said it would keep the Mighty 5 parks – Arches, Bryce Canyon, Canyonlands, Capitol Reef and Zion – open, while Arizona planned to keep the Grand Canyon operational. Colorado also said it would also keep its four national parks and other federal lands open.
Defense Department:More than 2 million US military personnel, including active duty and reserves, would continue their duties during a shutdown, according to the latest planning document from the Pentagon, but they could potentially work without pay until a deal is reached. It would depend, in part, on whether Congress would pass legislation similar to the one it approved prior to the 2013 shutdown that guaranteed that the military would be paid during the impasse. Meanwhile, the Department of Defense’s robust civilian workforce supporting service members’ efforts could be affected. About 45% of the civilian workforce – more than 800,000 employees – would be furloughed.
Read more abouteverything that could be impacted during a government shutdown.
CNN’s Haley Britzky and Jennifer Hansler contributed to this report.
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries has not yet informed his members whether he plans to back Speaker Mike Johnson’semerging funding plan, which would include a different three-month spending plan than the one the two men personally negotiated, according to multiple sources.
Jeffries is expected to make his position clear only after the GOP plan survives the party’s conference meeting, which is happening now. Democrats may meet again later Friday before deciding a path forward.
Democratic lawmakers told CNN they are waiting on Jeffries before making any decisions themselves. Several said they could be convinced to vote either way, depending on their leader, but believe the party will stick together like it did on Thursday to help increase their leverage in any future talks.
Jeffries opened the door to working with Johnson earlier Friday.
US government agencies began communicating with employees who would be furloughed in the event of a shutdown, the White House said.
“In the interest of prudent planning — we want to be prudent here — agencies did start notifying their employees for of their potential furlough today at noon,” White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre told reporters Friday.

The White House Office of Management and Budget began communicating to federal agencies one week prior to the potential shutdown, issuing standard but mandatory guidance about planning for a lapse in funding. OMB has been in regular touch with counterparts across the federal government since then.
Each department and agency has its own set of plans and procedures in the event of a shutdown.
President Joe Biden spoke with Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill on Friday, the White House said, the first time the administration has confirmed that Biden is involved with Congressional negotiations to avoid a government shutdown.
White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre said “just moments” before an afternoon press briefing, Biden spoke with Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries.
“Also, just to add that the president does indeed get regular updates. He has been getting ready regular updates from his team,” Jean-Pierre said. “His team has been in touch with members, congressional members from both sides of the aisle, and certainly he will continue to stay updated.”

Asked why the president hadn’t spoken to the American people or been more involved in negotiations, Jean-Pierre said Biden has “had this approach before.”
“He understands how Congress works,” she said. “He’s been around for some time. He understands what strategy works here to get this done. So, this is not, this is not the first time.”
She also continued to place the blame squarely on Republicans for the potential shutdown.
House Speaker Mike Johnson and Majority Leader Steve Scalise told reporters they’d find out soon what the GOP’s plan is to try and avert a shutdown as they entered a meeting to present their idea to their Republican colleagues.
“You will find out soon,” Johnson said. “We’re gonna talk to the conference and I’ll give you the final decision when this is over,” he added.

Scalise said they “had some really good, productive meetings this morning, and we’re going to be laying out a few options to the members right now, and we’re going to be ready to then move to floor action, but have to first talk to our full membership.”
He added: “And you know, our main objective is to keep the government open and to provide relief to disaster victims and farmers. You know, you saw elements of that last night that Democrats said no to, but I still think there’s a path to getting this done.”

Asked if they would require the procedural step of a rule vote, which would slow down the process of passing any bills, Scalise said they had not decided yet.
“We’ll be talking about that as well. That hasn’t been resolved, but we’re going to be talking with our members about that,” he said.
The short-term spending bill currently being discussed by House Republicans also includes an extension of the farm bill, according to multiple sources.
The 3-month continuing resolution could see a floor vote later today. The farm bill would be extended for one year if it is passed.
Thousands of air traffic controllers, still required to report to work without pay if a government shutdown begins at 12:01 a.m. Saturday, will receive their last normal paycheck on Christmas Eve according to their union.
“Many of you are rightfully concerned about if, and when, you will receive a paycheck, especially during the holiday season,” a Thursday post on the website of the National Air Traffic Controllers Association said.

Controllers “are expected to continue to report for duty,” NATCA said. “All paid leave will likely be cancelled” and “employees on an authorized absence from duty during the shutdown will be placed in a furlough status for the duration of their absence.”
The Department of Transportation’s latest operations plan listed nearly 13,000 air traffic controllers as expected to report to work during a government shutdown. The plan also details that air traffic controller hiring and training will cease, potentially deepening a shortage of air traffic controllers.
Other potential impacts:That shortage could cause the impact of a government shutdown to be felt more acutely in the nation’s control towers and radar facilities that guide tens of thousands of flights each day. Over the Thanksgiving travel period, United Airlines said FAA staffing shortages impacted its customers flying in and out of Newark airport.
Air traffic controllers covering Newark’s air space have been in particularly short supply over the last few years, causing the Federal Aviation Administration to shift coverage to its Philadelphia facility earlier this year. So far, as the Christmas travel season kicks off Friday, FAA has not listed any staffing impacts on its daily advisory, but there are concerns a government shutdown will put added strain on the system.
House Republican leaders are again revising their plans and now expect to hold votes on a new funding plan, according to GOP sources.
Three bills:The Republican leadership now wants to hold separate votes on a three-month government funding bill, a $100 billion disaster package and a $10 billion farm aid bill.
No debt limit:The GOP is unlikely to hold a separate vote on thedebt limit, the politically fraught issue that President-elect Donald Trump injected into the negotiations when he tanked an original bipartisan deal earlier this week. Trump has said he wants the debt limit addressed while President Joe Biden is still in office, but a separate vote on the issue is not currently part of the latest plan, the Republican sources said.
A vote tonight or tomorrow:It’s unclear when the House will vote or how many Democratic votes they will need to assist with passage.
GOP leaders are debating voting tonight under a process that would require two-thirds of the chamber to agree, or waiting to vote until tomorrow by first passing arule that would require only a simple majorityto pass the funding plan, according to a source.
The situation is highly fluid, and House Speaker Mike Johnson has not formally communicated any plan to his members.
The full GOP conference is expected to meet soon.
House Republicans are expected to meet behind closed doors early Friday afternoon as leadership tries to sell their latest deal, according to multiple lawmakers and aides.
Lawmakers are scrambling to come up with a compromise before the end of the day that avoids a government shut down.
House GOP leaders are eyeing a funding strategy that would allow lawmakers to take a series of separate votes on funding the government andraising the debt limit, in a last-minute bid to avert a shutdown.
Lawmakers would take four separate votes: A three-month spending stopgap, a $100 billion disaster package, a $10 billion farm aid package, and a debt limit hike, according to two GOP sources briefed on the plans.
The House GOP plans to hold a conference meeting later today to brief members.
House Speaker Mike Johnson and his leadership team have not made a final decision, but they hope to move rapidly, as lawmakers are eager to leave town for the holidays.
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer continues to push for the House to vote on the original bipartisan stop-gap funding deal, despite insistence from House Republicans that the bill is dead.
“If Republicans do not work with Democrats in a bipartisan way very soon, the government will shut down at midnight. It’s time to go back to the original agreement we had just a few days ago. It’s time the House votes on our bipartisan CR,” he said.“It’s the quickest, simplest and easiest way we can make sure the government stays open while delivering critical emergency aid to the American people. If the House put our original agreement on the floor today, it would pass and we could put the threat of a shutdown behind us,” the New York lawmaker said.“Our agreement would keep the government open, provide emergency aid for communities battered by hurricanes and other natural disasters, support our seniors, support our doctors, nurses, rural hospitals, and protect our farmers from the dairy cliff. As I said, the only, only way to get anything done is through bipartisanship.”

House Republicans are planning to head to the Rules Committee to launch the process of bringing something to the floor, GOP Rep. Ralph Norman said Friday morning as he left House Speaker Mike Johnson’s office, but it’s unclear what the party would be voting on.
This approach indicates that Republicans are going to try to peel off just enough Democrats to support their new plan to avert a federal government shutdown. By going through the Rules Committee, Republicans would just need to earn a simple majority in favor of their plan, rather than a two-thirds majority under suspension.
The details of the new proposal still have not been released and everything remains extremely fluid. If the Rules Committee meets, they have to give an hour notice. And as of this writing, a notice has not been given.
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries accused Republicans of pushing the country toward a government shutdown on Friday.
Asked if the debit limit issue was a red line for him, he told CNN’s Manu Raju:
“Extreme MAGA Republicans are marching America to a painful government shutdown that will crash the economy and hurt working-class Americans because they would rather enact massive tax cuts for their billionaire donors than fund cancer research.”

As he went in to address his caucus, Jeffries didn’t answer if he would be open to a short-term funding bill without raising the debt limit as some Republicans have floated.
Inside, Jeffries told Democrats that he has reopened a line of communication with Republicans.
“Because of our display of unity, the lines of communication have been reopened,” Jeffries told Democrats in their meeting, according to a source who was in the room.
This post was updated with Jeffries’ remarks during his meeting with the Democratic caucus.
GOP Rep. Lauren Boebert said she thought Donald Trump was “possibly sold a bad bill” Thursday night and that she did not want the president-elect’s first demand of House Republicans to be a failure, as 38 Republicans bucked leadership and his wishes by voting down the plan that he supported.
“I think President Trump was possibly sold a bad bill. I voted for it because we do want to do that. But unfortunately, I didn’t want to see what we saw last night. I did not want to see a failure on the House floor for the first demand that President Trump is making. And so now we are working to get something that will not fail for the president,” she told CNN.

The timing of any vote today remains fluid. Earlier on Friday, Republican Rep. Anna Paulina Luna told reporters that the House would vote at 10 a.m. ET but members and aides say there is no vote scheduled at this time as negotiations are still ongoing.
This post was updated with the latest on the timing for a possible vote.
House Speaker Mike Johnson on Friday said he has a plan to call members of Congress back to vote on a bill that will keep the government funded as the deadline to do so edges close.
This comes as House Democrats have denounced billionaire Elon Musk’s outsized influence over the government and as Republicans say President-elect Donald Trump should hop on a plane to Washington to try to negotiate a deal in person.
Government funding expires at midnight tonight.
Here’s what you need to know:
House Freedom Caucus member says votes are happening at 10 a.m. ET, but has no details of a plan:
Democrats slam Musk’s role as “shadow president:”
Republicans call on Trump to get personally involved in negotiations:
Discussions are underway among House Republicans to drop a suspension of the national debt limit — despite Donald Trump’s demands — in order to avoid a damaging government shutdown at month’s end, according to GOP sources.
It’s unclear what the final decision will be or if the latest plan can pass Congress, given it will need significant Democratic support.
Democratic sources say they may be pressured to support to a clean extension of government funding, which more closely mirrors the original deal before Trump got involved, but stress they need to see the final version and are frustrated that they’ve been left out of the process.
GOP Rep. Bob Good of Virginia left the meeting in House Speaker Mike Johnson’s office with Vice President-elect JD Vance and others telling reporters there are still lots of options being discussed but believes that debt ceiling will be off the table.
“The debt ceiling, I don’t think is going to be on the table for for the vote that’s taken before the end of the year,” Good told CNN.

The meeting in Johnson’s office is still ongoing but votes are expected later today.
Republican Rep. Anna Paulina Luna told reporters that the House will vote at 10 a.m. ET but would not disclose any details about the plan.
Luna’s remarks came as she briefly emerged from a meeting with key House Republicans and Vice President-elect JD Vance. Luna is a Freedom Caucus member who has been part of the talks to avert a shutdown tonight at midnight.
“We’re not cutting deals with Democrats, we are going to work it out here. I do not believe the government is going to be shutting down. You guys will see some great stuff, very similar to President Trump’s plan last night,” she said before re-entering Johnson’s office.

President-elect Donald Trump confounded members of Congress and flipped the government spending debate on its head when he demanded a premature increase tothe debt ceilingon “Biden’s watch” rather than his own.
He doubled down on his call in a Truth Social post overnight Friday, calling for the “ridiculous” ceiling to be extended into 2029.
Trump, in an interview with NBC News, has also endorsed abolishing the limit on federal debt — currently more than $36 trillion — altogether.
These are positions long championed by liberals and anathema to old-school conservatives, though few are to be found in today’s Trump-controlled Republican Party. And there are compelling political reasons why Democrats might not want to go along with Trump’s plan to ditch the ceiling: it provides them leverage in future negotiations with Republicans.
America is hours away from a holiday season government shutdown courtesy of Donald Trump and Elon Musk.
Everyone knew the president-elect and his new super-disrupter buddy were going to cause havoc in Washington. But no one thought they’d manage it even before the 47th president is sworn in.
Barring a pre-Christmas legislative miracle, the US government will plunge into a partial shutdown at midnight Friday after Musk tanked a year-end spending deal and the Trump doubled down with a demand for new debt spending authority that he never had a chance of getting through Congress.
House Speaker Mike Johnson’s desperate Plan B on Thursday only succeeded in coming up with a bill that sparked a revolt on the House floor against Trump by 38 Republicans and almost all Democrats.
Two days of chaos on Capitol Hillupended what had appeared to be a calm end to a bitterly ill-tempered 118th United States Congress.
It was a Wednesday social media storm by Musk, who will co-chair an ad-hoc Department of Government Efficiency next year, and the return of Trump’s congressional wrecking ball that turned everything on its head.
“Truly, I don’t know what’s going on,” Maine Republican Sen. Susan Collins said at one point on Thursday as Johnson frantically struggled — and failed — to enact his Plan B.

Johnson had worked for weeks to try to keep the government open. That is now a strategy that threatens his already wobbling speakership since plenty of MAGA Republicans would be happy to see it close, even though that could inconvenience and economically harm many of their working-class voters.
By Thursday evening, his authority was in tatters as furious Republicans turned on one another on the House floor. Democrats suddenly emerged from their post-election funk to warn that the real new power in the land was not Trump but the world’s richest man: “President Musk.”
Read Collinson’s full analysis here.
Donald Trump on Friday morning said if there has to be a government shutdown, he wants it to occur while Joe Biden — not he — is president.
“If there is going to be a shutdown of government, let it begin now, under the Biden Administration, not after January 20th, under ‘TRUMP,’” the president-elect posted to Truth Social.
“This is a Biden problem to solve, but if Republicans can help solve it, they will!” he said.
House Speaker Mike Johnson told reporters he has a plan and is expecting to vote again this morning.
“We’re expecting votes this morning, so y’all stay tuned, we’ve got a plan,” Johnson said.

When pressed if there is a new agreement though, Johnson added, “We’ll see.”
Johnson is currently meeting with Vice President-elect JD Vance,Russell Voughtand GOP lawmakers in his office.
Vice President-elect JD Vance, Russell Vought, Donald Trump’s pick to lead Office of Management and Budget and members of the far-right House Freedom Caucus are meeting in House Speaker Mike Johnson’s office, two sources tell CNN.
The meeting comes as Republicans try to figure out their next move after 38 GOP lawmakers voted against their leadership’s plan to fund the government.
President-elect Donald Trump called for the debt ceiling to be extended to 2029 on a late nightpostingon Truth Social.
“Congress must get rid of, or extend out to, perhaps, 2029, the ridiculous Debt Ceiling.”

Without the debt ceiling extension, Trump argued, “we should never make a deal.”
Trump helped tank a short-term bill this week that would have funded the government through March in part over his concern that the debt ceiling could interfere with his legislative agenda in 2025.
Thedebt ceiling, which was suspended by the bipartisan Fiscal Responsibility Act in June 2023, will return on January 2. At that point, the Treasury Department will have to use the cash it has on hand to pay the nation’s bill.
Trump on Thursday backed a newly negotiated bill that would extend the debt ceiling until 2027. That bill failed to pass the GOP-controlled House.
Trump is now calling for the debt ceiling to be extended until his second, and last term, in the White House is over.
Congress isbarreling towarda government shutdown after the GOP-led House failed to pass a funding plan backed byPresident-elect Donald Trumpon Thursday, leaving Hill Republicans scrambling to find a path forward.
The Trump-endorsed plan was opposed by almost all Democrats, who are frustrated and angry after the president-electtanked an earlier bipartisan deal, and a significant number of Republicans.
Government funding expires at the end of the day on Friday.
Here’s what else you should know:
What was in the bill:
Ahead of the vote:
Reaction to the failed vote:
President-elect Donald Trump has invited Amazon founder Jeff Bezos to the inauguration during what was described as a friendly dinner, a source familiar with the matter told CNN.
Trump dined with Bezos and Elon Musk at Mar-a-Lago Wednesday night, CNN previously reported.
The Wall Street Journalwas first to report on the invitation.
CNN has reached out to Bezos for comment.
After the failed House vote tonight, Speaker Mike Johnson blamed Democrats and said GOP leaders will find another solution.
“We will re-group and we will come up with another solution. So stay tuned,” Johnson told reporters.“It’s very disappointing to us that all but two Democrats voted against aid to farmers and ranchers, against disaster relief, against all these bipartisan measures that had already been negotiated and decided upon,” he said.

There were no more votes in the House Thursday night as Republican leaders meet behind closed doors to chart a path forward.
Vice President-elect JD Vance blamed Democrats after the House failed to avert a government shutdown, arguing they are trying to prevent President-elect Donald Trump from “negotiating leverage” in the first year of his new term.
“The Democrats just voted to shutdown the government even though we had a clean CR (continuing resolution), because they didn’t want to give the president negotiating leverage during his first term — the first year of his new term. And number two because they would rather shut down the government and fight for global censorship bulls**t, they’ve asked for a shutdown and I think that’s exactly what they’re going to get,” Vance said.

Vance did not respond when it was mentioned 38 Republicans also voted against the bill, nor did he answer a question on whether he is meeting with House Speaker Mike Johnson tonight to regroup.
Vance was joined on Capitol Hill by his wife Usha, their three children and his German Shepherd, Atlas.
GOP Whip Steve Scalise said that House Republicans are unlikely to bring this latest proposal through the House Rules Committee to try to pass it with a simple majority.
The reason? It still wouldn’t pass.
“We are going to go back to the table and keep negotiating like we did last night,” Scalise said.

Pressed on if Republicans would try to bring it through rules, he said: “Not on this bill. Not right now.”
Republican Sen. Kevin Cramer told reporters he wants President-elect Donald Trump to come to Washington, DC, and help with negotiations in-person as the Friday midnight deadline to avoid a government shutdown looms.
“I think one of the ways that this could get fixed fairly quickly would be if President Trump would come up to Washington tomorrow or spend the weekend here and talk to people face to face,” Cramer said “Let’s face it, I mean, he’s, you know, he’s got a lot of sway and persuasion. He acts more like the sitting president than the sitting president, and if he’d come up, I think he could help move things along.”

Cramer said he still hopes they can avert a shutdown, though he doesn’t see a path forward at this point, after House Republican leadership’s latest package failed on the floor earlier Thursday evening.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.