Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The workers’ union representing more than 10,000 Starbucks  baristas said that union members will go on strike in Los Angeles, Chicago and Seattle on Friday morning.
Workers United, which has a bargaining delegation that represents workers at 525 Starbucks stores in the United States, said walkouts are expected to spread each day and reach hundreds of stores from coast to coast by Christmas Eve unless Starbucks (SBUX) and the union reach a collective bargaining agreement.
The union and Starbucks created a “framework” in February to guide organizing and collective bargaining. Negotiations between the company and Workers United began in April, based on the framework, that could also help resolve numerous pending legal disputes.
“Since the February commitment, the company repeatedly pledged publicly that it intended to reach contracts by the end of the year, but it has yet to present workers with a serious economic proposal,” the union said in astatementlate on Thursday.
Starbucks said the union “prematurely” ended a bargaining session this week.
“It is disappointing they didn’t return to the table given the progress we’ve made to date,” the company said in a statement. “We are ready to continue negotiations to reach agreements. We need the union to return to the table.”
The union has been urging Starbucks to increase wages and staffing at its stores as well as implement better schedules.
Starbucks has faced a difficult year: Sales have slipped forthree straight quarters, its longest decline in years. Some customers have stopped going to Starbucks because of high prices for drinks and long wait times, and hundreds of its stores have voted to unionize in protest of pay, benefits and working conditions.
In August the struggling coffee chain it had tapped Chipotle CEO and corporate fix-it manBrian Niccolto be its new chairman and CEO, effective September 9.
On just his second day on the job,Niccol said in a letter to employeesand customers that he wants to return Starbucks to its roots as a “community coffeehouse” with comfortable seats, design and a clear distinction between “to-go” and “for-here” service.
CNN’s Jordan Valinsky contributed reporting.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.