Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Big Lots is preparing to close its remaining 963 locations after a sale to save thebankrupt retailerfell through.
The company previously announced it was selling “substantially all” of its assets to private equity firm Nexus Capital Management in September, but Big Lots said in a statement Thursday it “does not anticipate completing” the transaction.
As a result, Big Lots is starting its “going out of business” sales at all remaining locations in the coming days. However, it still plans to explore other options to save the company, including negotiating with Nexus or another buyer, with the aim of completing a sale by early January.
Up to 555 employees will lose their jobs, according toa layoff notice. Among those layoffs include corporate employees, such as the president and CEO.
“We all have worked extremely hard and have taken every step to complete a going concern sale,” Big Lots CEO Bruce Thorn said in a press release. “While we remain hopeful that we can close an alternative going concern transaction, in order to protect the value of the Big Lots estate, we have made the difficult decision to begin the (going out of business) process.”
Big Lots blamed several economic factors for its bankruptcy, including high inflation and interest rates that led customers to change their purchasing behavior. They’re seeking out value — but not necessarily lower costs. That’s whydollar stores have been strugglingwhile sales at Walmart and Amazon have been booming.
Big Lots has been closing hundreds of stores since thebeginning of the year. At its peak, it had more than 1,400 locations across the United States.
Prior to filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, Big Lots warned it had “substantial doubt” about its ability to remain operational. A regulatory filing said that there’s a “significant likelihood” of a potential default on a 2022 loan that could torpedo survival efforts for the 57-year-old retailer.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.