Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Elon Musk is wading into more than just American politics, throwing his support behind a far-right German political party.
Musk, the billionaire Trump ally who isplaying a public rolein the incoming administration, posted in support Friday of Alternative for Germany, or AfD, after the German government collapsed this week.
“Only the AfD can save Germany,” Musk wrote Friday while re-posting a video from far-right political activist Naomi Seibt.
The AfD, which has recently seen its popularity swell, has touted populist and anti-immigrant “Germany first” positions. But the party has also been accused of resurrecting Nazi-era ideology and slogans. In May, a judge ruled that Germany’s domestic intelligence agency could continue to keep the the AfD under surveillance for the alleged threat it poses to German democracy, rejecting a challenge by the party.
Its youth arm, the Young Alternative (JA), has been designated by German authorities as a “confirmed extremist” organization. The party’s lead candidate in the eastern German state of Thuringia, Björn Höcke, was convicted earlier this year after breaking German laws against uttering Nazi slogans in public.
Related articleElon Musk flexes his political muscle, sending government on path to shutdown
But the party has seen growing support. AfDrecently becamethe first far-right party to win a state election in Germany since the Nazi era, though all of the country’s mainstream political parties have said they will not sit with them in a coalition, which will be necessary to form enough seats for a ruling government.
It’s not the first time Musk has waded into German politics. In June, he responded to a video of Seibt’s asking “Why is there such a negative reaction from some about AfD? They keep saying ‘far right,’ but the policies of AfD that I’ve read about don’t sound extremist. Maybe I’m missing something,” he wrote. And last month he labeled German Chancellor Olaf Scholz a “fool” after his governing coalition collapsed.
On Friday, Musk continued posting about the AfD, writing in response to a user’s post about the party’s immigration policy that it “sounds reasonable.”
Musk began following AfD leader Alice Weidel on X who responded to his endorsement, posting a video expressing gratitude.
“Alternative for Germany is indeed the one and only alternative for our country; our very last option. I wish you and President Donald Trump all the best for the upcoming tenure!” she wrote.
Christian Lindner, the leader of Germany’s pro-business Free Democratic Party, also responded to Musk’s post Friday urging him not to “rush to conclusions from afar.”
“While migration control is crucial for Germany, the AfD stands against freedom, business – and it’s a far-right extremist party,” Lindner wrote.
Musk has increasingly thrown his support behind far-right causes in Europe. Earlier this year,Musk agitatedanti-immigration riots in the UK, writing on his social media platform that “civil war is inevitable” in response to a post blaming the violent demonstrations on the effects of “mass migration and open borders.”
Earlier this week, Nigel Farage, the far-right populist British politician and Trump ally, said Musk was considering funding his Reform UK party.
Writing in theTelegraph newspaper, Farage said that after meeting with Musk he “left us in no doubt that he is right behind us” and was in “ongoing negotiations” about making a financial contribution.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.