Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Boeing still believes it can get permission before the end of this year to fly the 737 Max again.
The plane has beengrounded by aviation authoritiesaround the world since March because oftwo fatal crashesthat killed all 346 people aboard the flights. Those crashes have been tied to anautomatic safety systemon the plane. Boeing has said it is working around the clock on a fix for the problem.
Boeing’s(BA)stock rose 4.5% on the news, on track for its best day since June. That helped lift the Dow(INDU)into positive territory: Boeing is the most heavily weighted stock in the index.
Since this summer Boeing has said that it hoped to get approval from the US Federal Aviation Administration for the plane to fly again sometime in the fourth quarter of this year.
The FAA has refused to comment on a timeline for recertification, stating last month that it “will lift the grounding order only after we have determined the aircraft is safe.”
But Monday Boeing said it “continues to target FAA certification of the MAX flight control software updates during this quarter. Based on this schedule, it is possible that the resumption of MAX deliveries to airline customers could begin in December.” Boeing noted, however, that the decision rests with FAA.
In recent weeks there have been new questions about whether Boeingwould be able stick to that schedule, especially when it was revealed last month that some of its employees hadquestioned the plane’s safetyin internal communications during the original certification process in 2016. The FAA stated that communication was “concerning” and that it was “disappointed” that Boeing had not made the regulator aware of the communication earlier in the investigation.
Boeing hascontinued to buildabout 42 of the jets each month even, although it can’t deliver them to customers during the grounding. The deliveries are important to Boeing, because it collects most of the money from a sale when a plane is delivered to an airline.
Boeing has previously said the process of working through the backlog of completed planes will take until 2021, since it can’t immediately deliver all the planes it built.
Related articleBoeing CEO Muilenburg won't get most of his 2019 pay
The company also said it is “working towards final validation of the updated training requirements, which must occur before the MAX returns to commercial service, and which we now expect to begin in January.”
The airlines have pushed back on the date when they expect to resume the flights they have canceled due to jet’s grounding. Southwest Airlines(LUV), which owns more of the grounded 737 Max jets than any other company, said in a filing last week that the uncertainty about its return to service means it won’t be able to resume the canceled flights until March.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.