Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The Nissan Ariya, the company’s first all-electric SUV, will be able to drive up to 300 miles on a single charge and features a high-tech interior, with almost no buttons or knobs, according to the automaker.
The vehicle was unveiled during an online event Wednesday.
Nissan became one of the first major car companies to offer an all-electric car when it introduced the Leaf in 2010. At the time, Nissan had big plansto make a whole lineup ofelectric vehicles, which then-CEOCarlos Ghosnpredicted would make up 10% of the global car market by 2020.
So far, things haven’t turned out the way. Last year, electric vehicles made up just 2.6% of all cars sold globally, according to the International Energy Agency. Besides a new and improved Leaf, the only other electric vehicle Nissan offers widely is the eNV, a plug-in version of the Nissan NV van, which isn’t sold in the U.S. Nissan executives have said the company will come out witheight new electric vehicles by 2022.
The Ariya crossover SUV will become Nissan’s second electric vehicle available in the US. It’s bigger and roomier than the Leaf, a compact car, and has a design somewhat like Nissan’s Murano SUV. The most noticeable difference is the front “grille” design. Electric cars don’t require nearly as much incoming air as gasoline-powered car, so the front grille is purely a design feature. The Ariya’s grille has a large sunken area with a subtle pattern that’s supposed to resemble a traditional Japanese kumiko design. It also has a slightly redesigned Nissan logo that lights up.
Inside, the Ariya has a particularly roomy interior thanks to the lack of an engine under the hood. Things that usually impinge on interior space, like the air conditioning equipment, are located under the hood instead.
In place of buttons and switches most so-called secondary controls – for things like climate control and the stereo – are handled through “capacitive haptic switches,touch-sensitive icons that light up on the dashboard.
The Ariya’s large flat battery pack is mounted under the SUV’s floor, which allows the vehicle to have a completely flat floor, an arrangement also found in a number of other electric models including the Tesla Model Y.
The Ariya will be available with Nissan’s ProPilot Assist driver assistance technology thatallows some hands-free driving on highwaysin some countries. The hands-free driving technology, which is similar to systems offered byGeneral Motors and, soon, Ford, will be available in the US first on the Ariya, a Nissan spokesman said.
Related articleFord's electric Mustang will offer hands-free driving technology next year
The electric SUV will be available in front- or all-wheel-drive and with a choice of two battery pack sizes. The base model will have a 63 kilowatt-hour battery pack.With the larger 87 kilowatt-hour pack, the Ariya will be able to go about 300 miles on a charge based on US EPA tests, according to Nissan. Nissan did not release a range estimate for the SUV with the smaller battery pack.
The Ariya will be able to go from a stop to 60 miles an hour in about 5 seconds, Nissan chief operating officer Ashwani Gupta said in an online meeting with journalists. That performance is similar to Nissan’s 370Z sports car.
The Ariya will go on sale in Japan in the middle of 2021 and in thnited States later next year. Prices in the US will start at about $40,000. That’s a few thousand dollars less than competitors like theFord Mustang Mach-Eor theTesla Model Y.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.