Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Right-wing media outlets are ignoring Donald Trump’s embrace of far-right conspiracy theorist Laura Loomer, shielding their audience from the uproar amid condemnation from top Republicans.
In recent days, Donald Trump hasmingled with Loomer, the radical conspiracy theorist who has a well-documented history of pushing racist, sexist, Islamophobic and homophobic hate. Loomer has been banned from most social media platforms for her vile rhetoric, though her account wasrestoredin 2022 on X after Elon Musk, himself an avid Trump supporter, purchased the platform.
Related articleLaura Loomer, far-right provocateur who spread 9/11 conspiracy theory, influencing Trump as he searches for a message
Loomer’s presence with Trump at this week’s presidential debate and 9/11 memorial ceremonies has drawn widespread attention from mainstream news outlets, with major publications and television outlets spotlighting her appearance with the former president. The move has also ignited public condemnation and disgust even among those in his own party.
But right-wing media outlets have largely ignored her close proximity to Trump and the ensuing controversy.
On Fox News, the network mentioned Loomer’s presence just once since she was first seen deboarding Trump’s private plane on Tuesday at the Philadelphia debate, according to TVEyes database searches. [After this story was published and CNN had reached out to Fox News, the network aired a 26-second segment on the matter during “Special Report” with Bret Baier.]
A check of the right-wing network’s website also showed zero mentions of Loomer this week. That was also the case in other pro-Trump outlets, including the websites of Breitbart, The Daily Wire, One America News, and The Gateway Pundit.
It’s not the first time Fox and other friendly pro-Trump spaces have outright ignored or distracted their audience from an unflattering story facing Trump.
Earlier this year, when former Vice President MikePence announcedduring a live Fox News interview that he “cannot in good conscience” endorse Trump’s latest bid for the White House, the network quickly buried its own scoop. According to the progressive media watchdog Media Matters, Fox News devotedjust four minutesto the news over the ensuing three-day period, compared to more than an hour on CNN and MSNBC.
Related articleRight-wing influencers say they were dupes in an alleged Russian influence operation. They’re keeping their millions, for now
In effect, Fox and its right-wing media counterparts insulate their conservative audience from events that might dim their perception of Trump, and instead offers viewers a safe space where their existing beliefs are reinforced by sympathetic hosts and guests.
Still, some of Trump’s allies in the Republican party expressed outrage over Loomer’s recent rhetoric as she was seen traveling with the former president.
“The history of statements by Ms. Loomer are beyond disturbing,” Republican Sen. Lindsey Grahamtold The Washington Poston Thursday. “I hope this problem gets resolved. I think we should be talking about things that people are concerned about, and this issue, I think, doesn’t help the cause.”
GOP Sen. Thom Tillis alsoposted on social mediathat Loomer is “a crazy conspiracy theorist who regularly utters disgusting garbage intended to divide Republicans. A DNC plant couldn’t do a better job than she is doing to hurt President Trump’s chances of winning re-election. Enough.”
It was a bridge too far even for Rep.Marjorie Taylor Greene, the far-right congresswoman known to promote conspiracy theories, whowrote on social mediathat Loomer’s post was “appalling and extremely racist.”
She added: “It does not represent who we are as Republicans or MAGA.”
Asked about the controversy on Friday, Trumprefused to disavow Loomer, saying that he doesn’t control her.
“Laura’s been a supporter of mine, just like a lot of people are supporters, and she’s been a supporter of mine,” Trump said. “She speaks very positively of the campaign. I’m not sure why you asked that question, but Laura is a supporter. I don’t control Laura. Laura has to say what she wants. She’s a free spirit.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.