Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
America’s slowing job market is taking a toll on people’s moods.
The Conference Board’s latest consumer survey showed that Americans became much more pessimistic about the US economy’s current health and the future of the job market.
The monthly survey’s Consumer Confidence Index fell to a reading of 98.7 in September, down from August’s upwardly revised 105.6. That decline was worse than economists had predicted.
“Consumer confidence dropped in September to near the bottom of the narrow range that has prevailed over the past two years,” said Dana Peterson, chief economist at The Conference Board, in a release. “September’s decline was the largest since August 2021 and all five components of the Index deteriorated.”
The US job market is in decent shape, but it is clearly running at a much slower pace these days than it has in recent years. In July, employers had thefewest job openings since January 2021and the unemployment rate stood at 4.2% in August,up from a half-century low of 3.4%last seen in 2023. Employers just aren’t hiring at the same break-neck pace they did when the US economy first rebounded mightily from the Covid-19 pandemic.
Related live-storyMixed news on US jobs: Unemployment rate falls but hiring is slowing
Americans have taken note. Peterson said the weaker-than-expected survey results “reflected consumers’ concerns about the labor market and reactions to fewer hours, slower payroll increases, fewer job openings — even if the labor market remains quite healthy, with low unemployment, few layoffs and elevated wages.”
The job market’s fate is unclear. It could continue to weaken, possibly drifting into recession territory, or it could hold steady and even accelerate. The Federal Reserve last weekdelivered a supersized interest rate cut, paring back rates from a 23-year high that lasted for more than a year. The central bank’s top leader, Jerome Powell, said in a news conference that aggressive action reflects the Fed’s commitment to preserving the job market’s health.
There might be some light at the end of the tunnel, too. Employers might be holding back on hiring for two good reasons: Uncertainty over the upcoming US presidential election and the fate of interest rates,CNN previously reported. That means hiring could pick up once the country knows whether Vice President Kamala Harris or former President Donald Trump will become the next president and if the Fed continues to lower interest rates, easing pressure off businesses of all sizes.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.