Our live coverage of the protestshas moved here
The Los Angeles Police Department said 93 people were arrested on suspicion of trespassing during Wednesday’s demonstrations at the University of Southern California.
“The university is a private campus and the group had been violating some of their orders. It was a trespass at that point and we assisted with the arrests,” Los Angeles Police Captain Kelly Muniz said duringa briefing.
One person was also arrested for assault with a deadly weapon, Muniz said. She did not provide further details.
No protesters or officers have been reported injured, police said.
Some context:USC’s Department of Public Safety ordered protesters gathering at the campus’ Alumni Park Wednesday afternoon to disperse or face arrest for trespassing.
At one point during the demonstrations,tensions escalatedas protesters refused to relocate and remove their tents and other prohibited items, a university official said.
The universityclosed its campusWednesday evening as LAPD began arresting demonstrators.
Negotiations between protesters and Columbia University officials about clearing the encampment on its lawn that had beenextended for 48 hourshave been “unstable,” said Esha Karam, managing director of Columbia Daily Spectator, citing student organizers.
“We’re about halfway through that extended deadline of 48 hours and we heard from organizers on the student front earlier today in apress conferencewho told us that the negotiations are ongoing so unstable at the moment,” Karam told CNN.

There’s still around another 24 hours to go until the extended deadline “but really after that, we don’t really know where things are going,” Karam added.
House SpeakerMike Johnsoncalled Wednesday for the resignation of the university’s president if she can’t “bring order to this chaos.”
Student reactions to calls for the college president’s resignation have been mixed, Karam said.
She said there are “some who are willing to see her continue to lead and continue to work with her.”
The California State Polytechnic University, Humboldt campus will remain closed through the weekend as protesters, including “unidentified non-students,” continue to occupy two buildings, school officials said in anupdate.
Work and classes will remain remote, and officials are considering keeping the campus closed for longer.
“There are unidentified non-students with unknown intentions, in Siemens Hall,” the officials said.“This creates an unpredictable environment. In addition, all entrances to the building are barricaded, creating a fire hazard. Adding to health and safety concerns, many toilets are no longer working.”

Other buildings on the campus in Arcata are at risk of being occupied, and protesters “have shown a willingness” to lock themselves in facilities and steal equipment, the officials said.
“Campus officials are communicating with protestors and continuing to encourage them to leave as soon as possible.”
Graffiti described as “hateful” has been painted on campus, the officials said.
“The University condemns in the strongest terms all forms of hatred, bigotry, and violence. Anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, hatred, and bigotry in all forms have no place at Cal Poly Humboldt.”

The university “supports free speech through open dialogue that is respectful and constructive,” the officials said.
“That does not include behavior that involves destroying and damaging property, and disrupting students, faculty, and staff from learning, teaching, and working. Everyone deserves to be in an environment where everyone can feel safe, included, and respected.”

A photographer was among those arrested during clashes between protesters and law enforcement on the University of Texas at Austin campus on Wednesday.
Fox 7reportedthat their photographer was detained and arrested. The station did not identify the employee.
In an eveningupdate, the Texas Department of Public Safety said that 34 arrests had been made by law enforcement on the campus as of 9 p.m.
CNN has contacted Texas DPS, UT Austin Police, and UT Austin for information on this arrest.
Update: As of 9 p.m., 34 arrests have been made by law enforcement on the UT Austin campus related to today’s protest.
The Columbia University Board of Trustees released a statement Wednesday saying they strongly support President Minouche Shafik, who has facedcalls for her resignationamid intense pressure to rein in days-long protests.
“The Columbia University Board of Trustees strongly supports President Shafik as she steers the university through this extraordinarily challenging time,” the board said in astatement Wednesday. “During the search process for this role, President Shafik told us that she would always take a thoughtful approach to resolving conflict, balancing the disparate voices that make up a vibrant campus like Columbia’s, while taking a firm stance against hatred, harassment and discrimination.”“That’s exactly what she’s doing now,” the trustees added.

The board said it is “urgently working” with Shafik to resolve the unrest on campus and “rebuild the bonds of our community.”
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department said in a statement on X Wednesday evening that “the dispersal order at the South Mall has ended. All University rules are still in effect.”
FINAL UPDATE - ALL CLEAR. The dispersal order at the South Mall has ended. All University rules are still in effect.
As of 9 p.m. CT,  34 arrests have been made by law enforcement on the UT Austin campus, according toan X postfrom the Texas Department of Public Safety.
Amid arrests of pro-Palestine protesters across universities, the Muslim Public Affairs Councilcondemned calls for the deployment of the National Guard, saying the “crackdown on students with an overwhelming militaristic force has set a dangerous precedent for university administrations nationwide.”
“The Muslim Public Affairs Council calls on the people of conscience, including faculty and leaders, to oppose threats to deploy the National Guard on the Gaza Solidarity Encampment at Columbia University, whose aim is to push back against the university’s continued financial investment in corporations that profit from Israeli apartheid, genocide, and occupation in Palestine,” the council said in a  statementWednesday.

MPAC urged for a reevaluation of strategies used to handle protests on campuses across the country and says it advocates for “approaches that emphasize de-escalation and address students’ concerns through constructive means rather than force and intimidation.”
In a previous statement onTuesday, MPAC accused the White House of having double standards for issuing a response condemning violence and physical intimidation against Jewish students at Columbia University, but says the administration “consistently fails to extend the same sentiments to students who face repeated violence, intimidation, doxing, and harassment for their pro-Palestinian advocacy.”
The Los Angeles Police Department arrested approximately 50 protestors at the University of Southern California aftercampus police gave a dispersal orderto demonstrators, according to a CNN crew at the scene.
Campus police announced earlier that anyone who stayed in the area would be subject to criminal trespass laws.
Video from the scene showed protestors not resisting arrest as LAPD handcuffed them with zip ties and escorted them away from the ongoing protest.
The University Park Campus, the University of Southern California’s main campus, has been closed due to the ongoing protests, the university saidin a statement.
“The UPC campus has been closed as a result of significant activity at the center of campus. Students will have access through pedestrian gates with their USC IDs. Everyone who is on campus will be able to leave,” the post says.

The campus closure comes as Los Angeles Police Department officers started arresting protesters at the university.
Los Angeles Police Department officers are arresting protesters at the University of Southern California for criminal trespassing after a dispersal order was announced by campus police at a university park.
Demonstrators were seen on video being zip-tied and led away by officers as other protesters chanted, “Let them go.”
Those detained did not appear to resist officers. Organizers have advised protesters not to resist arrest.
There is growing tension at Columbia University amid the pro-Palestinian protests on the New York campus.
House Speaker Mike Johnson on Wednesdaycalled for the resignation of school President Minouche Shafik, while pro-Palestinian student protesters are demanding Columbia cut all financial ties with Israel.
“It’s pretty disheartening to see all this on campus. I will say I think a lot of people are misguided,” said Michael D’Agostino, a senior student at the university.

While most protests have been non-violent, some Jewish students are expressing concern for their safety.
“The antisemitic comments and activity is running rampant,” said Jessica Schwalb, a Jewish student at Columbia.
The university recently shifted to hybrid classes due to safety concerns, allowing students to take classes and final exams online.
“It’s making harder to go to classes and everything. And things are switching to going remote,” said Rony Anyin, a sophomore student.

The University of Southern California’s Department of Public Safety ordered protesters at the campus’ Alumni Park to disperse Wednesday afternoon.
Officers told demonstrators to leave the area within 10 minutes or be subject to criminal trespass.
“Everybody has to leave the Alumni Park area and adjacent area. This is private property. If you stay on this property, you’ll be subject to … criminal trespass,” a campus Department of Public Safety officer said on a loud speaker while standing by Los Angeles Police Department officers. “You have 10 minutes to leave the park.”

Protesters could be seen sitting with their arms linked, standing and chanting in the park after the announcement from the police.
Following a tense news conferencerepeatedly interruptedby protesters on the steps of Columbia University on Wednesday, House Speaker Mike Johnson said he was not surprised by the strong reaction and defended his decision to speak out at the New York campus amidst threats to his speakership back in Washington.
“The speaker speaks for the House of Representatives. And I felt it was very important for that voice to be heard, not just about what happens in Columbia, but about what is happening right now around the country,” he told CNN’s Erin Burnett.“We have to stand unequivocally for the right and the good and I’m calling on all my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to speak out against this, not to endorse it, not to coddle these people, but to say this has to stop. We have to treat every single person with dignity and respect. And that’s not happening here, and it’s an atrocity,” he went on.

Asked if he believes protesting the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza and the loss of life of innocent civilians is antisemitic in and of itself, Johnson said that he believes “there’s always a place for debate and the free exchange of ideas but let’s not equivocate on what’s happening with Hamas and in Gaza.”
“This is a battle, as Prime Minister Netanyahu said, between good versus evil, light versus darkness, civilization versus barbarism. This isn’t a close call,” Johnson said.
The University of Texas Austin recently sent students an email alerting them that there was a “Notice of Dispersal Order” following a day of clashes and arrests on the campus.
“I am Assistant Chief Ashley Griffin and I represent the University of Texas at Austin Police Department. Your conduct is in violation of Penal Code Sections 42.01 Disorderly Conduct, 42.02 Riot, 42.03 Obstructing a Highway or other passageway. I command you in the name of the People of the State of Texas to disperse, and if you do not, you shall be arrested for Violation of Penal Code Section 42.01 Disorderly Conduct, 42.02 Riot, 42.03 Obstructing a Highway or other passageway,” the email said.

Texas Department of Public Safety said earlier that more than 20 people were arrested after the Palestine Solidarity Committee organized a walkout and occupation of the school’s South Lawn.
The demonstrations led to confrontations between police officers, state troopers and students.
The demonstration at USC escalated when protesters refused to relocate and remove their tents and other prohibited items, Provost Andrew T. Guzman said in a statementposted online.
Many of the protesters “do not appear to be affiliated with USC,” he said.
“Their actions have escalated to the point of confrontation and have threatened the safety of our officers and campus community,” Guzman said.
Campus gates have been closed and officials are “taking action to restrict growth of the protest and keep the rest of the campus calm,” the statement read.
“We want to be clear that we reject speech that is hateful and that causes harm to others. In these challenging times, we call on the Trojan Family to remember that every member of our community is deserving of respect, has the right to be safe on campus, take classes, and participate in other campus activities without fear of harassment or bullying. It should be everyone’s priority to treat each other with kindness and care,” Guzman continued.“We will do all that is required to maintain the safety of every member of our community,” he said.

The scene at the University of Southern California’s University Park campus has calmed aftermajor activity eruptedduring a demonstration earlier on Wednesday.
The dean of Columbia College, the undergraduate liberal arts college at Columbia University, sent an email Wednesday to alumni about the protests on campus, describing it as a “difficult moment” for the New York school.
“I have heard from numerous alumni, parents and students voicing their thoughts on what they have witnessed personally or observed from a distance in recent days.”
“I have heard from numerous alumni, parents and students voicing their thoughts on what they have witnessed personally or observed from a distance in recent days,” wrote Josef Sorett, dean of Columbia College.“No one can or should dictate how anyone thinks or feels, particularly in the face of such complex and vexing issues. All I can offer at present is my perspective — and as much information as we have at present — even as, I will admit, words are surely inadequate,”

In his email, Sorett stressed “several key points regarding the situation on and around campus,” including “unacceptable instances of intimidating and harassing behavior on our campus.”
He added: “Let me state emphatically that Antisemitic or Islamophobic rhetoric — like any other language used to hurt, harass and frighten people — has no place in our community… However, it is important to recognize that the University is limited in its ability to control the actions or words of members of the public on the streets surrounding campus – even as we acknowledge that not every incident has been outside the gates and that some Columbia affiliates are not without fault.”
More than 20 arrests were made at the University of Texas campus in Austin on Wednesday, according to the Texas Department of Public Safety.
“The Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS) responded to the University of Texas (UT) campus in Austin today at the request of the University and at the direction of Texas Governor Greg Abbott, in order to prevent any unlawful assembly and to support UT Police in maintaining the peace by arresting anyone engaging in any sort of criminal activity, including criminal trespass,” the department said in a statement.

The department also said it will “continue adjusting operations as needed in order to assist our law enforcement partners and maintain the public’s safety.”
Some context:The Palestine Solidarity Committee in Austin organized a walkout and occupation on the school’s South Lawn in Austin.
It led to multiple confrontations between police officers, state troopers “in full riot gear with batons” and the students, Amelia Kimball, associate managing editor at The Daily Texan, told CNN News Central.
The Council on American-Islamic Relations chapter in Austin, Texas, condemned “unnecessary and excessive force” used by police officers Wednesday to arrest students protesting the Israel-Hamas war.
Fayyaz Shah, board chair of CAIR Austin, said law enforcement should “exercise restraint and respect the rights of protesters.”
“In a democratic society, the right to peacefully protest and express dissenting opinions is fundamental. The use of large numbers of heavily armed law enforcement officers to arrest student activists advocating for a ceasefire in Gaza represents a troubling suppression of these rights,” Shah said in a statement.
Shaimaa Zayan, operations manager of CAIR Austin, stressed that law enforcement should prioritize de-escalation and dialogue when handling peaceful protests.
“Sending in a massive armed police force to arrest students advocating for peace sends the wrong message and only exacerbates tensions further,” Zayan said in a statement.
Texas state troopers in riot gear broke up a group of protesters at the University of Texas at Austin after a demonstration Wednesday. The Austin Police Department told CNN they are assisting the University of Texas Police Department with transporting arrested protesters.
Althea, a Jewish student in the encampment, said she’s been subject to harassment being part of the pro-Palestinian movement on the Columbia University campus.
She wears a Star of David necklace along with a keffiyeh, which hasbecome a symbol of Palestinian identity. She said her family has roots in the Middle East, and that she’s a Mizrahi Jew.
“I’ve been called a terrorist. I’ve been called a Jew hater. I’ve been called an enemy of my own people, none of which are true, because Judaism and Palestinian liberation go hand in hand,” she said to CNN just outside of the encampment.

She asked not to be referred to by her last name for privacy concerns.
Althea said combatting anti-Semitism and Islamophobia go hand in hand.
“I would honestly say that the biggest threat to us on campus right now is the heavy presence of NYPD,” she said.
She said Palestinian rights came to the forefront of her consciousness after she visited Israel last year through a trip organized by the campus Hillel. She said she visited a town on the Mediterranean coast where on one side was a Palestinian town and the other was an Israeli.
“On one side, there’s this pristine environment that’s Israeli homes. On the other side, it’s a slum, like it’s dirty… the Palestinian village doesn’t have the resources to be able to clean up and function. A lot of the houses don’t have electricity.”
The encampment at Columbia observes the Muslim daily prayersas well as Sederfor the Jewish holiday of Passover.
“I think being Jewish inside the encampment has given me a very helpful perspective, where I’m able to say yes, I attended this Seder a couple nights ago with a lot of Palestinian and Muslim students who were welcomed with open arms,” she said.
Columbia University officials pushed back on assertions from protesters that the school threatened it would bring in the National Guard to help address the pro-Palestinian protest encampment.
“I also want to make a point about an assertion that’s been made, a rumor that is baseless, about the university bringing in the National Guard,” Columbia University Vice President of Public Affairs Ben Chang said Wednesday evening. ”Let me be clear, that is untrue and an unsubstantiated claim.”He added: “Our focus, our goal is to restore order and if we can get there through dialogue, we will.”

The Secure Community Network – a consortium of Jewish communitysecurity officialsacross the nation – said Wednesday it is closely monitoring protest developments on college campuses and is urging administrators to “restore calm and order,” noting at least 20 significant protests are reportedly underway.
SCN “is closely monitoring safety and security conditions for potential escalation and impact to Jewish students and faculty/staff,” the organization said in a statement, adding threat watchers “tracked a record 516 threat incident and suspicious activity reports on campuses in 2023.”
“Schools must restore calm and order,” said SCN National Director & CEO Michael Masters. “The best way to do this is to enact and enforce strict anti-tent, anti-encampment policies, and have zero tolerance for assaults on either students or police. Schools must also ensure collaboration with law enforcement and students to create an environment of safety. Failure to enforce these rules will lead to escalating protests.”
Universities must act if they don’t want matters to get out of hand,” he said.

As CNNhas reported, SCN analysts routinely monitor both online and physical threats, and share investigative tips with law enforcement and Jewish houses of worship in the US.
Texas Governor Greg Abbott said that arrests of pro-Palestinian protesters at the University of Texas at Austin would continue “until the crowd disperses.”
“These protesters belong in jail,” Abbott saidon X. “Antisemitism will not be tolerated in Texas. Period.”

State troopers in riot gear, including some on horseback, were seen byCNN affiliate KEYEbreaking up a group of protesters at demonstrations at the University on Wednesday.
The Palestine Solidarity Committee in Austin organized the walkout and occupation on the school’s South Lawn.
Amelia Kimball, an associate managing editor at The Daily Texan, told CNN there was a “physical clash” between students and police at UT Austin on Wednesday.
“Numerous arrests have been made, numerous students have been put in squad cars,” Kimball said.
Abbott called for the expulsion of any students protesting in Texas. “Students joining in hate-filled, antisemitic protests at any public college or university in Texas should be expelled,” he wrote.
However, Democratic Rep. Greg Casar, whose district covers part of Austin, was critical of the police’s response to protesters in a post on social media.
“Freedom of speech and peaceful assembly are basic constitutional rights,” Casar postedon X. “Student protesters — whether you agree with them or not — have a right to safety & fairness. Responding to peaceful demonstrations with weapons and riot gear escalates tension and makes everyone less safe.”
The post was updated with comments from Rep. Greg Casar.
As on-campus protests continue Wednesday afternoon, the University of Southern California has closed its gates and is requiring individuals who need access to its campus to present identification.
“There is still significant activity at the center of the UPC campus due to a demonstration. The gates are closed, so anyone coming to campus should be prepared to show an ID at the gates for class or for business. Please continue to avoid the center of campus unless you have a class,”the university announcedin an online statement.

The scene at the University of Southern California’s University Park campus has calmed aftermajor activity eruptedduring a demonstration earlier today.
Hanan Ashrawi, a longtime leading figure in Palestinian politics and a peace negotiator, issued a statement Wednesday in support of pro-Palestinian protesters at college campuses across the United States.
“To all academics—students, faculty & staff —in universities throughout the US standing up for freedom & justice in Palestine: yours is the voice of courage & humanity,” Ashrawi said ina post on the social media platform X, “You are the antidote to racism & genocide. You are the conscience of the US, in contrast to the complicity & criminality of the government. You give us hope. We love you.”

Ashrawi has held various leading roles in the Palestinian government over several decades, including as the minister of education.
House Speaker Mike Johnson said he metwith Columbia University’s president and asked her to take immediate action to address the unrest on campus.
The speaker called on Nemat “Minouche” Shafik to resign after visiting the university on Wednesday.
“We met briefly with the president and her top officials right before we came out on the steps here. We encourage her to take immediate action and stamp this out. And our feeling is that they have not acted to restore order on the campus,” he said.

Johnson said he would call President Joe Biden immediately after departing the campus and demand he take action, not ruling out the need for the National Guard to step in at some point.
“My intention is to call President Biden after we leave here and share with him what we have seen with our own two eyes and demand that he take action, there is executive authority that would be appropriate. If this is not contained quickly, and if these threats and intimidation are not stopped, there is an appropriate time for the National Guard,” he said.
Hundred students and protesters booed and chanted during House Speaker Mike Johnson’s press conference at Columbia University Wednesday.
Protesters chanted, “Free, free Palestine,” and “Disclose, divest, we will not stop, we will not rest.” The crowd also chanted, “From the River to sea, Palestine will be free.” (That last chant, used frequently at demonstrations, demands equal rights and the independence of Palestinians, although in some cases it is intended to call for the abolishment of Israel.)
Most of the crowd appeared to participate in the chant, “Mike, you suck.”
Grace, a graduate student who asked CNN not to use her last name, said Mike Johnson needs to “go away.”
She is a regular student passing by, she said, and hasn’t faced any major disruption from protesters. She said she is more disturbed by the NYPD’s presence.
“Why he wants to come here to give a political show, I don’t know,” Grace said of Johnson. “This is very embarrassing, and you can see we don’t like him at all.”
House Speaker Mike Johnson called on Columbia University President Nemat “Minouche” Shafik to resign during a tense press conference Wednesday during which the crowd repeatedly interrupted the speaker and at times loudly booed him and other GOP lawmakers who were with him as they stood at the mics.
“We just can’t allow this kind of hatred and antisemitism to flourish on our campuses, and it must be stopped in its tracks. Those who are perpetrating this violence should be arrested. I am here today, joining my colleagues and calling on President Shafik to resign if she cannot immediately bring order to this chaos,” Johnson said.

Johnson visited Columbia University to meet Jewish students and delivered remarks along with other Republican lawmakers. When Johnson and the GOP lawmakers first walked up to the mics to begin speaking, there were loud boos. At one point during the remarks from Johnson, the crowd started chanting loudly, to which the speaker said, “Enjoy your free speech.”
The timing of Johnson’s visit comes as the embattled speaker is facing an onslaught of conservative criticism and as a handful of members, led by Georgia Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, have threatened to oust him.
The pressure has only intensified after he helpedsteer a foreign aid packagethrough the House that included assistance to Ukraine, which many hardline conservatives vehemently opposed. Johnson has defended his leadership in the face of the growing threats, saying that he will not resign and warning that a vote to oust him could cause chaos in the House.
Parker De Dekér, a Jewish student at Columbia University, said Wednesday the threats against him and other Jewish students feel “almost like a betrayal.”
“We understand what it feels like to be marginalized. Our ethnic populations have been marginalized for thousands of years,” De Dekér said on “CNN News Central.”
“In this movement, we want to advocate for peace in the Middle East just like everybody else. We want there not to be war between Israel and Hamas. We want there to be a ceasefire contingent upon those hostages being released….but it seems that our identities now have become a pawn in this, like, political game.”
De Dekér said he stands with students who want to speak out on what is happening in the Middle East but said “we’re seeing the blurring of the lines” between peaceful and violent protests.
He also said he wants House Speaker Mike Johnson, who is meeting with Jewish students on Columbia’s campus Wednesday, to “understand that antisemitism against Jewish individuals is not a political ploy.”
“This is Jewish safety we are talking about. These are our identities. Our stories shouldn’t be weaponized,” he said.
De Dekér also called on Johnson to work toward creating bipartisan solutions against antisemitism and other forms of hatred. He also cautioned against asking the university’s president to resign, adding that it could “create a lot more turmoil within our university” and instead “request more accountability from our universities, request more transparency.”
Negotiations between protesters and officials at Columbia University about clearing the lawn with the encampment had been extended for 48 hours.
Student protesters “won the concession that the university will not call law enforcement on our peaceful protests” early Wednesday, Khymani James, a student at Columbia, said during a news briefing Wednesday afternoon.
“While we have received written assurances that our encampment will continue, the university continues to make threats in its attempts to stifle its students’ political speech,” he said.
When asked by CNN about the written assurances, James said there was an update posted to the university’s website Wednesday morning.
There have been no public updates posted to the university’s website since Tuesday, according to a review by CNN.
In a statement to CNN early Wednesday, Columbia said “student protesters have committed to dismantling and removing a significant number of tents.”
“That was a bad faith negotiation made before the university threatened to call the National Guard on us,” said another student protester, Basil Rodriguez.
Susan Ellingwood, AVP of public affairs at Columbia, said to CNN: “Deploying the National Guard was never on the table.”
When asked what protesters would say to students who say they feel unsafe on campus, Rodriguez said: “Listen to our demands.” What the protesters are advocating for is “mutually beneficial to everyone” and “acting out of love,” Rodriguez said.
The scene at the University of Southern California’s University Park campus has calmed after major activity erupted during a demonstration, according to CNN’s Nick Watt, who is on the scene.
Tensions escalated when the USC Department of Public Safety started dismantling some tents on campus and people shouted “hands off,” as seen by a CNN crew. Protesters surrounded a campus safety officer as he tried to remove a tent.
Minutes later, a crowd of protesters and media surrounded campus safety apprehending a man in a yellow vest, who appeared to be handcuffed and placed into a campus security vehicle.
Protesters crowded around the vehicle, chanting, “Let him go.”
When campus security released the apprehended protester, the situation was diffused, according to Watt. Many tents have been cleared since then.
Columbia University student protesters said Wednesday they will not stop protesting until their demands to the university are fulfilled, and said they cannot confirm nor deny whether non-students are in the encampment on campus.
“We are not going anywhere. We are not going anywhere until our demands are met,” Khymani James, a student at Columbia, said during a news briefing Wednesday.
Student protesters were asked multiple times whether non-students were inside the encampment on Columbia’s campus.
“We cannot confirm or deny that,” James said. “What I will say is: a reminder that Columbia is an open campus.”
There have been multiple confrontations between police officers, state troopers “in full riot gear with batons” and students on the University of Texas at Austin campus as officers continue to break up a pro-Palestinian protest Wednesday, Amelia Kimball, associate managing editor at The Daily Texan, told CNN News Central.
“Numerous arrests have been made, numerous students have been put in squad cars,” Kimball said.
In a live ground shot from CNN affiliate KEYE, a very large crowd of protesters can be seen along with police officers on the University of Texas at Austin campus.
Kimball described the event as a “severe escalation.”
During the interview, Kimball said there was a “physical clash” between students and police. In the live feed from KEYE, pushing and shoving could be seen between police and protesters.
The Austin Police Department is providing assistance to the University of Texas Police Department with transporting arrestees in relation to the incident on their campus after a request was made by UTPD, a spokesperson with APD told CNN in an email.
“The University of Texas has a dedicated police department that serves as the primary point of contact for any safety or security concerns on their campus,” the email reads.
Pro-Palestinian protests are taking place at major American universities Wednesday.
The protesters and their supporters, including faculty in some cases, are condemning crackdowns on demonstrations and free speech. Some students, parents, donors and lawmakers are pleading with administrators to take new steps to restore order.
Demonstrations are ongoing at Columbia University, Brown University and other campuses.
Here’s what has happened so far:
Texas State troopers in riot gear, including some on horseback, began breaking up a group of pro-Palestinian protesters at the University of Texas at Austin shortly after a demonstration began Wednesday.
The Palestine Solidarity Committee in Austin organized the walkout and occupation on the school’s South Lawn. According to an Instagrampostannouncing the event, students were encouraged to bring “blankets, food and water, face masks, and lots of energy.”
Amelia Kimball, associate managing editor at The Daily Texan, told CNN there were no plans for an encampment like on other university campuses across the country.
Kimball said students gathered in a central area of campus and within minutes were ordered to disperse. Kimball said she’s seen law enforcement form multiple blockades in the area to keep the crowd dispersed.
She also described “tense interactions” and “physical struggles between police and students.” Some of those scenes, including an arrest, were captured by CNN affiliate KEYE.
“I don’t think students were expecting this kind of a response,” she said on CNN, saying some students have spread out while others remain in the crowd.
Kimball said she started noticing a large law enforcement presence earlier in the day before the protest began.
CNN has reached out to the Texas Department of Public Safety, the University of Texas and Austin Police.
There is “significant activity” at the University of Southern California’s University Park Campus due to a demonstration,according to an alertsent by the school on Wednesday.
“There may be difficulty accessing that area,” according to the school.
Tuesday’s protest on campus was peaceful this morning and protesters had set up tents, according to CNN’s Nick Watt, who is on the scene.
Texas State Police were seen pushing back pro-Palestinian protesters on the University of Texas at Austin campus Wednesday afternoon, as witnessed by CNN affiliate KEYE.
Footage aired on CNN showed a chaotic scene, with what appeared to be shouts of “disperse” from law enforcement officers and a large crowd of student protesters shouting back.
“There does seem to be some escalating levels of distress, and protesters are continuing to chant, and the police are forming multiple blockades to keep protesters from moving,” Amelia Kimball, associate managing editor at The Daily Texan, said on air with CNN.
Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg reacted Wednesday to the ongoing pro-Palestinian protests that are taking place on university campuses across the country, calling for protesters to “safely” make their voices heard.
He also highlighted the importance of distinguishing between peaceful protests and harassment.
“It is important when people are exercising those rights to free speech, to protest, to assembly, that they do so safely,” Buttigieg said on Fox News Wednesday afternoon, adding later: “We have to make a distinction between what is legitimate free speech, inquiry, protest, debate, ferociously contested ideas. That’s one thing. And of course, also a recognition of the pain that is driving so much of the passion around the issues in the Middle East.”
Buttigieg also condemned any expressions of antisemitism or threats of physical violence or harm against Jewish students.
“Any expression of antisemitism or hatred is unconscionable, it must be called out, it must be confronted. And that’s certainly what President Biden has done in unambiguous terms,” Buttigieg said, continuing: “Especially disturbing [is] the idea that a student would be targeted and harassed simply because they are Jewish, or simply because they look Jewish.”
Columbia University student protesters issued a statementon XWednesday afternoon claiming that university administration provided a written commitment Tuesday night to not call in the New York Police Department or the National Guard to break up the encampments after students refused to stay at the negotiating table.
“The University’s previous threats of an imminent sweep by the NYPD or the National Guard had severed negotiations. The administration’s threats backfired when student negotiators refused to stay at the table,” according to the statement.
Susan Ellingwood, assistant vice president of public affairs at Columbia, told CNN earlier Wednesday that “deploying the National Guard was never on the table.”
The students’ statement was posted on behalf of Columbia University Apartheid Divest, the student group responsible for organizing the original encampment on the East Lawn. It has also been involved in organizing the West Lawn encampment and negotiating with Columbia’s administration.
“Columbia’s reliance on the threat of state violence against peaceful protestors has created an unstable ground for the negotiations process which will continue over the next 48 hours. However, Columbia’s written commitment and concession not to call the NYPD or the National Guard signifies an important victory for students,” the statement continued.

Student protesters said they plan to hold a news briefing at 2:30 pm ET outside the university’s Butler Library.
Two arrests were made during a pro-Palestinian protest on Ohio State University’s campus on Tuesday, according to a university spokesperson.
“When yesterday’s demonstration became disruptive to the students, faculty and staff in Meiling Hall, the university issued multiple warnings. When the disruptive activity continued, two individuals were arrested,” OSU spokesperson Benjamin Johnson said. “Ohio State has an unwavering commitment to freedom of speech and took this action in alignment with our space use rules to provide for the orderly conduct of university business.”
In amessageto faculty and students on Monday, Ohio State University President Walter “Ted” Carter Jr. said the university would “consistently enforce” its space rules, “which do not allow for intentional disruptions of university events, classes, exams or programming, including commencement.”

“When protected speech becomes incitement or threats of violence, Ohio State has and will always move quickly to enforce the law and university policy. I will not compromise on this,” the president wrote, noting that OSU would continue to have university police on site for student demonstrations.
Any violation of university policy will get a warning, but may be “cited, referred to Student Conduct and/or arrested” should they continue, Johnson told CNN.
When asked if OSU would consider the students’ demands for divestment from Israel, Johnson said state law “prohibits the university from divesting any interests in Israel and prohibits adopting or adhering to a policy that requires divestment from Israel or with persons or entities associated with it.”
President Joe Biden will be in New York City Friday, but White House and campaign officials told CNN Wednesday there have been no internal discussions about him visiting Columbia University.
Some demonstrators say the Biden administration iscomplicit in the deaths of the many thousands of civilians in Gaza.
Groups of senior White House officials have traveled to cities with large Muslim and Arab populations in recent weeks to meet with local community leaders and hear their concerns – gatherings that have at times prompted calls for boycotts.
White House spokesman Andrew Bates said Tuesday that the White House was monitoring “closely” the protests on college campuses and that he takes seriously the conversations he has had with community leaders about the current “painful moment.”
House Speaker Mike Johnson says he will call on Columbia University President Nemat “Minouche” Shafik to resign when he joins Jewish students on campus Wednesday.
“We’ll be hosting a press conference there with some of my colleagues from the House Republicans from New York to call on the president of the university to resign. It’s unconscionable. This President Shafik has shown to be a very weak leader. They cannot even guarantee the safety of Jewish students. They’re expected to run for their lives and stay home from class,” he said on Hugh Hewitt’s radio show Wednesday morning.

Johnson added that “what we’re seeing on these college campuses across the country is disgusting and unacceptable.”
While at the university this afternoon, Johnson will have a meal with Jewish students before the event. He will be joined by New York Reps. Mike Lawler, Nicole Malliotakis and others in the New York Republican delegation.
“We’re relying on and calling upon and demanding these university officials to control of the situation, which is just completely out of control right now,” Johnson said.
Johnson also proposed revoking federal funding and “student visas for these violent protests” in the wake of the unrest.
Columbia University notified students and faculty Wednesday morning that the hybrid model for classes will extend to final exams.
Provost Angela Olinto said in an email that all final course assessments, including exams, presentations and projects, “must include a remote option for students who have requested support for virtual assessment.”
The move was made “in order to address the concerns of our members in an evolving campus environment” on the main Morningside Heights campus, Olinto said.

The university announced classes, which end Monday, would be hybrid for the remainder of the academic year. Final exams take place from May 3 to May 10.
Olinto said that final assessments at Columbia’s Medical Center and Manhattanville campus will continue as scheduled.
Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant on Wednesday criticized the ongoing protests on US college campuses, saying they “are not only antisemitic, but also inciting terrorism” ina post on his X account.
“To our Jewish brothers and sisters — we stand with you,” Gallant said, calling for university officials and US authorities to “act now to defend Jewish youth.”
Some background:More than 130 people were arrested at New York University at a pro-Palestinian protest Monday night. NYUsaid it asked for help from the NYPDafter school officials said there were “intimidating chants and several antisemitic incidents” during a protest. That led to scenes of a chaotic confrontation between protesters and police in full riot gear. An NYPD official said the demonstrations weren’t violent overall, except for a few bottles thrown at police officers.
Yale University policearrested 45 protesters Mondayand charged them with criminal trespassing after they refused orders to leave, said police in New Haven, Connecticut, though dozens of protesters remained Tuesday morning.
USHouse Speaker Mike Johnsonsaid he plans to visit Jewish students at Columbia University on Wednesday and hold a press conference “regarding the troubling rise of virulent antisemitism on America’s college campuses,” according to his office.
Brown University said about 90 students were seen setting up an encampment and protest around 6 am ET on Wednesday, according to a university spokesperson, which is a “violation of University policy.”
The students on the Providence, Rhode Island, campus have been told they will be subject to “conduct proceedings,” according to spokesperson Brian Clark.
“Protest is an acceptable means of expression at Brown, but it becomes unacceptable when it violates University policies that are intended to ensure the safety of members of the Brown community and that there is no interference in the rights of others to engage in the regular operations of the University,” according to the statement.

“We have been troubled by reports of violence, harassment and intimidation at some encampments on other campuses, but we have not seen that kind of behavior at Brown. Any such behavior would not be tolerated,” the spokesperson added.
He also said there have been incorrect reports that the university’s policy prohibiting encampments was established this year. It has existed since 2011, but it was reformatted and moved to a different website about the school’s policies as part of a yearslong project, according to Clark.
As universities across the US continue to see pro-Palestinian protests, data shows that only about 7% of younger Americans strongly favor the US providing military aid to Israel in its war against Hamas, while 29% strongly oppose it.
Meanwhile, about 30% of US adults over the age of 65 strongly favor providing military aid, while about 9% strongly oppose, according to Pew Research Center.
Meanwhile, there is not a big age difference among US adults on whether the country should provide aid to Gaza, with 25-33% strongly in favor of giving support, according to Pew Research Center.
As pro-Palestinian protests spread throughout college campuses nationwide, Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez from New York condemned the way administrators like Columbia University President Minouche Shafik have handled the issue on behalf of the student protesters.
“Calling in police enforcement on nonviolent demonstrations of young students on campus is an escalatory, reckless, and dangerous act,” wrote Rep. Ocasio-Cortezin a post on XTuesday. “It represents a heinous failure of leadership that puts people’s lives at risk. I condemn it in the strongest possible terms.”
Her comment came aday after a fellow New York Democrat, Rep. Jamaal Bowman, accused Columbia of caving to “right wing pressure.”
Overnight, protesters at Columbia University were seen removing tents from the lawn and carrying them off campus or relocating to other parts of the campus.
According to the university, student protesters “have committed to dismantling and removing a significant number of tents.”
“Student protesters will ensure that those not affiliated with Columbia will leave,” according to the university.
A Columbia spokesperson said student protesters “have taken steps to make the encampment welcome to all and have prohibited discriminatory or harassing language,” and will comply with FDNY safety requirements.
Columbia University said it has extended negotiations with student activists over the dismantling of the pro-Palestinian encampment that has cast its campus into days of turmoil, a spokesperson for the school said.
The statement came just hours after Columbia’s president announced it had given protesters a midnight deadline to reach an agreement or the university would consider “alternative options” to clear the encampment. The talks will now be extended another 48 hours after “important progress” was made, the spokesperson said.
As the protests stretch into their eighth day, Columbia President Minouche Shafik has faced numerous calls from donors and lawmakers who believe police should be brought in to clear the encampment and restore order on campus – even as students and faculty are condemning the president’s similar decision last week to ask the New York Police Department to clear another student encampment.
What students said shortly after midnight:Student protesters released astatement on Xat 12:13 am ET saying Columbia administration threatened to call in the National Guard and that students left the negotiating table and will not return until there is a written commitment that the “administration will not be unleashing the NYPD or the National Guard on its students.”
“This threat to our community comes on the seventh day of the encampment, six days after the University called the NYPD to forcefully remove more than one hundred student protesters, and two hundred days after Israel began its genocidal assault on Gaza,” the students’ statement said.

House Speaker Mike Johnson will head to Columbia University today to visit with Jewish students and deliver remarks and hold a press conference “regarding the troubling rise of virulent antisemitism on America’s college campuses,” according to his office.
This comes as pro-Palestinian protests have rocked major American universities, including Columbia. After days of tense demonstrations, Columbia University announced it ismoving to mostly hybrid classeson its main campus until the end of the semester, April 29.
New York House Republicans have called on Columbia president Minouche Shafik to resign immediately for failing to crack down on the protests.
President Joe Biden is “of course aware” of pro-Palestinian protests that have roiled college campuses across the country, the White House said Tuesday.
White House Deputy Press Secretary Andrew Bates told reporters traveling with Biden on Air Force One that the administration is “monitoring these situations closely,” taking the opportunity to condemn what he called “alarming rhetoric,” at some student protests.
“[The president]’s, of course, aware of the protests — we know that this is a painful moment for many communities, we respect that, and we support every American’s right to peacefully protest, that’s something that we have been consistent about,” Bates said.
“But as I said, when we witness calls for violence, physical intimidation, hateful, anti-Semitic rhetoric, those are unacceptable. We will denounce them. The president knows that silence is complicity and that’s why he uses the platforms he has to try and ensure that our fellow Americans are safe.”

But he wouldn’t say what the administration thinks of some Republicans’ call to deploy the National Guard to respond to campus protests at Columbia University. Bates added that the decision to deploy National Guard members would fall to New York Gov. Kathy Hochul.
Pro-Palestinian protests continue to rock major American universities, prompting school officials across the country to take extraordinary steps to confront the growing crisis.
The protests, counter-protests, actions by college officials and demands from lawmakers underscore the unrest that has engulfed universities, leading many students, especially Jewish students, to fear for their safety as the Passover holiday is underway.
Pro-Palestinian protesters and their supporters – sometimes including faculty – are condemning crackdowns on protests and free speech, while from some students, parents, donors and lawmakers are pleading with administrators to take new steps to restore order.
In recent days, the on-campus demonstrations have attracted non-university-affiliated protesters to the campus gates, which student organizers have sought to distance themselves from.
As the protests continue, a growing sense of unease has spread among Columbia University’s Jewish community as they enter the approximately weeklong observation of Passover, a major Jewish holiday celebrating freedom.
Hagar Chemali, an adjunct associate professor of international and public affairs at Columbia University, told CNN, “If I had my child at Columbia, I also would tell them to go home.”
“It’s not just because of the tension on campus, it’s also because those protests on campus have invited extremists outside,” Chemali said, referring to non-student protesters who have been demonstrating near the campus.
Read morehere.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.