Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Rio Tintoshareholders have rebelled overpayoutsto former CEO Jean-Sébastien Jacques and other executives who quit last year after the companydestroyeda 46,000-year-old sacred Indigenous site in Australia.
More than 60% of the votes cast at the mining company’s annual general meetings in London and Sydney were against its remuneration report, according toresultspublished by the company on Thursday.
Rio Tinto demolished the Juukan Gorge caves in Western Australia last May to expand an iron ore mine, causing an outcry from investor groups and local custodians of the land. The ancient caves have been described by one expert as “one of the most archaeologically significant sites in Australia.”
Rio Tinto(RIO)said Thursday that it “understands” the outcome of the advisory vote was a response to the remuneration of Jacques, as well as former head of the iron ore business, Chris Salisbury, and former group executive for corporate relations, Simone Niven.
Related articleRio Tinto blew up a sacred site in Australia. The CEO left but still got a huge payout
“The Board acknowledges that the executive pay outcomes in relation to the tragic events at Juukan Gorge are sensitive and contentious issues,” it added, saying that it will “engage further” with shareholders.
All three executives left the company at the end of December. Chairman Simon Thompsonis not seekingreelection to the board.
Jacques was stripped of bonuses worth £2.7 million ($3.8 million) last year, but his total remuneration still increased by 20% over 2019 to £7.2 million ($10 million). Jacques was succeeded as CEO by the company’s chief financial officer, Jakob Stausholm.
Rio Tinto previously defended the pay packages, saying that the three executives “did not deliberately cause the events to happen.” But the company has since updated its remuneration policy to allow for more leeway to claw back share awards and bonuses when its reputation or “social license to operate” has been adversely impacted.
The United Kingdom’s Local Authority Pension Fund Forum, which manages about £300 billion ($417 billion) in pension assets, said in a statement earlier this week that the large compensation increase awarded to Jacques in 2020 was “deeply worrying.”
“The board’s initial response to the caves’ destruction, insignificant remuneration consequences for the three executives deemed most culpable, was woefully inadequate,” it added. “It is hoped that the incoming chair and the new CEO will recognize the vital importance of meaningful and respectful engagement with Indigenous communities.”
While the vote is advisory, rather than binding, Australia’s Corporations Act stipulates that if 25% of a company’s shareholders object to a remuneration report for two years running, the entire board may face reelection.
— Michelle Toh contributed reporting.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.