Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Despite falling gas prices, ExxonMobil and Chevron reported bumper profits last quarter.While they were lower than last year, they still beatWall Street forecasts, as well as where they were ahead of the spike in energy prices that followed the invasion of Ukraine more than a year ago.
ExxonMobil, America’s largest oil company, earned $11.6 billion,excluding special items, down 38% from the record quarterly profit of $18.7 billion it earned on that basis in the third quarter of last year. That’s still more than double the $5.5 billion it reported in the first quarter of 2022. It was also more than $1 billion better than the $10.5 billion forecast by analysts surveyed by Refinitiv.
Chevron reported it earned $6.7 billion,excluding special items, down 40% from its record earnings of $11.4 billion in the second quarter last year, but just ahead of the $6.5 billion it earned on that basis a year ago. It also topped forecasts of $6.4 billion.
Oil companies around the world reported a massive surge in profits last year, following thespike in pricesthat followed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 and the sanctions on Russian energy exports that followed. But US gas pricesfell steadilyafter reaching arecord of $5.02 a gallonin June.
The average US price today is $3.67 a gallon, up nearly 6% from a month ago when OPEC and other oil-producing nations allied with it agreed tocut production, but down 12% from where they were a year ago when prices were still rising.
Shares of ExxonMobil gained 1% and Chevron(CVX)shares were little changed in premarket trading on the reports.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.