Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
A version of this story appeared in CNN Business’ Nightcap newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free,here.
At any Tesla event, you have to go in expecting a good amount of smoke and mirrors. This is the company run by Elon Musk, after all — its self-anointed Technoking who’s made overpromising and underdelivering a theme of his career.
But Thursday’s “Cybercab”robotaxi unveilingwas, even by Musk-ian standards for bluster, one giant optical illusion. The kind of spectacle that should remind everyone that the world’s richest person is someone who promotes and appears to relishmisinformationand hyperbole on a mass scale, whether he’sspeaking to investors, hismillions of followers on Xor whichever politician he feels is most likely to agree with his increasinglyright-wing and conspiracy-ladenworldview.
Tesla didn’t respond to a request for comment.
ICYMI: The robotaxis, Tesla’s fully driverless vehicles that it hopes to put into service next year, were themain event.But the company’s humanoid Optimus robots stole some of the spotlight as they danced and mingled with the crowd, pouring drinks and playing charades.
That all would have been impressive if not for a fewliiiittttlethings. Like, the fact that the robots were not actually autonomous and were being operated remotely by humans, which was first reported byBloomberg.At one point, an attendee evengot a bartending bot to admitthat it was being assisted by a human.
“This was not disclosed, and many thought they were operating autonomously,” Gordon Johnson, a longtime Tesla critic and short-seller, said in a note Monday.  “In our view, this isverydeceptive.”
The event — rather appropriately held on a Hollywood stage — was light on details about how Tesla plans to improve its “Full Self Driving” system, or how it plans to actually get its driverless cars on the road.
While the Tesla superfans in the crowd seemed happy enough, investors were looking for more than shiny objects.
“We were overall disappointed with the substance and detail of the presentation,” Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas wrote. “There was no demonstration of or updates to the latest advancements of FSD technology, no mention of any go-to-market strategy in a ridesharing service or supporting economic inputs for investors to dig into.”
Tesla shares sank nearly 9% on Friday.
Of course, Wall Street’s disappointment isn’t anything to lose sleep over. And the Tesla spell may have been only temporarily broken, as shares began inching higher Monday. Investors still value Tesla more than any other carmaker on Earth primarily because they’re still convinced he can deliver on all the grand promises.
Steve Jobs, the late Apple co-founder, was famous for his “reality distortion field” that often sold less-than-stellar products on sheer charisma. But Musk’s reality distortion field is something else entirely — hardly limited to overly optimistic timetables or pie-in-the-sky projections for Tesla’s delivery schedule. Whereas Musk might actually face some pushback from shareholders or market regulators for stretching the truth or failing to deliver on his promises, he’s free to promoteconspiracy theoriesandfar-right talking pointswith impunity on his own personal social media megaphone, X.
That’s where Musk and others promote racist conspiracies and false rumors about federal hurricane relief to his more than 200 million followers, even as officials are pleading for help to stop the misinformation (whichformer President Donald Trump is also spreading).
That is far from harmless musing on the internet.
Over the weekend, federal emergency workers were forced to halt their in hurricane-hit North Carolina after National Guard troops reported that an “armed militia” was “hunting FEMA,” according to theWashington Post, which cited an email to federal agencies.
A former FEMA administrator, Craig Fugate,told CNNthat while individual FEMA personnel have received threats in the past, it’s nothing like what the agency has experienced in recent days.
“This is unprecedented,” he said.
It’s not hard to see why, then, companies that advertise on X might be uncomfortable having, say, Dove body wash ads running alongside posts from Musk or any number of straight-up pro-Nazi accounts thatare thrivingunder his stewardship of the former Twitter.
Although X’s policies say that content glorifying violence will be banned, and that it would apply labels to symbols of hate, like swastikas, a recent NBC News analysisfoundthat X “does not appear to be enforcing those policies consistently.”
Unilever, the company that owns Dove, Hellmann’s and a couple dozen other consumer brands, was one of four companies X named in a lawsuit in August, claiming they staged an “illegal boycott” when they pulled their ads from the platform.
In a twist, though, X dropped Unilever from the lawsuit on Friday. In a statement, Unilever said X had “committed to meeting our responsibility standards to ensure the safety and performance of our brands on the platform.” It declined to comment beyond that statement.
Xsaid in a postthat the agreement with Unilever was “the first part of the ecosystem-wide solution and we look forward to more resolution across the industry.”
That’s the same industry, it’s worth noting, that Musk last year publiclytoldto go f—— themselves.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.