Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Uber has picked Melbourne as the first city outside the United States to debut itsflying taxis.
Test flights in the Australian city will begin by next year and the ride-hailing company is aiming to offer a commercial service from 2023, itannouncedTuesday.
“We will see other Australian cities following soon after,” Susan Anderson, Uber’s regional manager for Australia, said at the company’s annual flying car conference in Washington, D.C.
Melbourne will be the third city to host trials of Uber’s flying taxis, after Dallas, Texas, and Los Angeles, California. The electric taxis will be flown by a pilot.
Uber haspartnered with NASAon its flying taxi program, which it calls Elevate, and is one ofseveral companiesracing to make aerial vehicles a reality. Otherbig namesin the businessincludeRolls Royce and Boeing(BA).
Even as it works on developing autonomous, electric flying vehicles — which are still several years away — Uber is already taking its service to the skies in other ways.
The company will start a helicopter service on July 9 from Manhattan to JFK Airport. It says customers will save an hour of travel timeduring the afternoon rush hourby buying a roughly $200 ticket on the eight-minute flight.
But the rollout of that service is now clouded by safety concerns about increased air traffic in cities, following two accidents in New York City in recent weeks.
Related articleHelicopter crashes won't stop Uber's dream of flying cars
A helicoptercrashed on the roofof a Manhattan building Monday, killing the pilot. The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the crash. The fatality came weeks after ahelicopter crash in the Hudson Riveroff Manhattan; there were no deaths in that incident.
“For us, it underscores the need to make safety the absolute bedrock of everything we do,” said Eric Allison, Uber’s head of Elevate.
Safety will also be a key concern for Uber in Australia, where it currently has nearly 4 million customers of its regular ride-hailing service.
“We will continue to work with communities and governments to ensure that we create an urban aviation rideshare network that is safe, quiet [and] environmentally conscious,” Anderson said.
Matt McFarland contributed to this report.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.