Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
So wefinally got a rate cut— and a supersized one at that.
After the move was announced Wednesday, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell said officials made that decision to keep the US economy in its current “good shape.”
Will that pan out? Only time will tell, of course, but recent history doesn’t make it look like it’s a sure shot by any means.
Here’s a look at what could happen to the economy in terms of the labor market, inflation and the likelihood of a recession now that the Fed has lowered its sky-high benchmark lending rate.
Oftentimes, the Fed cuts interest rates because itexpects economic conditions will worsendrastically in the near future and it wants to preemptively soften the blow, knowing it sometimes can’t prevent a recession altogether.
Related articleThe most well-known recession indicator stopped flashing red, but now another one is going off
So in that regard, it shouldn’t be too shocking that recessions frequently begin after the Fed cuts rates.
Excluding the rate cuts that happened during the pandemic, the Fed has had six cutting cycles since 1990. Starting from the point that the Fed began cutting, the economy has fallen into a recession 18 months later on average.
But it’s a wide range: For instance, after the Fed began lowering rates in July 1995, it took 69 months for a recession to occur. However, a recession started immediately when the Fed cut rates in July 1990 and just two months after it cut in January 2001.
But it’s certainly not a comforting sign thatone recession indicatoris currently flashing.
On average, for those six cycles, the unemployment rate rose by 1.4 percentage points a year after the Fed cut rates.
But had it not been for the pandemic that occurred less than a year after the Fed cut rates in August 2019, the unemployment rate likely wouldn’t have sprung up by nearly five percentage points by August 2020.
For instance, a year after the Fed cut rates in July 1995, the unemployment rate was unchanged at 5.5%. And the unemployment rate was actually lower in September 1999 compared to September 1998, when the Fed began a cutting cycle.
In the other four instances, the unemployment rate was at least a percentage point higher a year after the Fed cut rates.
The Fed is currently playing risk manager. As it looks to keep the economy in good standing, a growing concern is whether cutting rates will cause inflation to spike.
Fed Governor Michelle Bowman, who voted for a smaller quarter-point cut as opposed to the half-point cut other officials voted for, said in a statement Friday that she wasconcernedthe larger cut could “unnecessarily” stoke demand, potentially ushering in more inflation.
The concerns are valid, based on past cutting cycles. For instance, after the Fed cut in 1996 and 2007, the annual pace of inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, rose by over a percentage point a year later. But in some cases, the Fed actually lowers rates in order to allow inflation to accelerate if prices are rising too slowly because consumers may be putting off purchases.
But in several other instances, inflation cooled significantly. Part of the reason for that is that the unemployment rate generally rose when inflation cooled. That’s because when consumers are unemployed, they tend to cut back on spending, which means businesses can’t pass along higher prices.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.