Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The European Commission opened formal proceedings Tuesday against social media firm TikTok over its suspected failure to limit election interference, notably in the Romanian presidential vote last month.
The European Union’s executive arm said it will request information and look into TikTok’s policy on political advertisements and paid-for political content as well as TikTok’s systems to generate recommendations and the risks of them being manipulated.
On December 5, the Commission ordered TikTok to freeze data linked to the Romanian election under the bloc’s sweeping Digital Services Act, which regulates how the world’s biggest social media companies operate in Europe.
Romania’s top court subsequentlyannulledthe presidential election after accusations of Russian meddling and the victory of pro-Russia ultranationalist Calin Georgescu in the first round.
The opening of formal proceedings Tuesday empowers the Commission to take further enforcement steps and to accept commitments made by TikTok. There is no specific deadline to complete proceedings.
Related articlePutin’s latest election meddling effort failed. It’s unlikely to stop him trying again
China’s Bytedance-owned TikTok said it had protected the integrity of its platform through more than 150 elections worldwide and had provided the European Commission with extensive information on its efforts.
It added it did not accept paid political advertisements and proactively removed content violating its policies on misinformation and hate speech.
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said the new investigation followed serious indications that foreign actors interfered in the Romanian presidential election.
“We must protect our democracies from any kind of foreign interference. Whenever we suspect such interference, especially during elections, we have to act swiftly and firmly,” she said in a statement.
The Commission is conscious of the risk of interference in the German parliamentary election in February and the presidential election in Croatia starting on December 29.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.