Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The Federal Trade Commission announced a final rule banning hotels and ticketing and short-term rental companies from including hidden junk fees in their total price on Tuesday.
Rather than consumers getting hit with “convenience” or “service” fees for hotel bookings and concert tickets at checkout, the FTC said its new rule will ensure that pricing information is presented transparently before consumers agree to pay.
“People deserve to know up-front what they’re being asked to pay — without worrying that they’ll later be saddled with mysterious fees that they haven’t budgeted for and can’t avoid,” said FTC Chair Lina Khan in astatementannouncing the rule. “The FTC’s rule will put an end to junk fees around live event tickets, hotels, and vacation rentals, saving Americans billions of dollars and millions of hours in wasted time.”
The final rule does not limit what sellers can charge for a product or service. Instead, it requires businesses to display the total price, including all additional fees, more prominently than other pricing information.
The rule was approved with bipartisan support among the commissioners of the FTC. Andrew Ferguson, President-electDonald Trump’s pick to replace Khanas FTC chair, was the sole dissenter.
In astatement, Ferguson, who currently serves as a commissioner of the FTC, said that his decision to vote against the rule had nothing to do with its merits, but, rather, that he believed that President Biden’s FTC should no longer issue new rules in the wake of Trump’s election win.
Related articleTrump selects Andrew Ferguson as pick for Federal Trade Commission chair
“I dissent only on the ground that the time for rulemaking by the Biden-Harris FTC is over,” Ferguson said. “This lame-duck Commission should give its regulatory pen a much-needed rest.”
“My vote… should not be understood to state my position on the Final Rule’s merits, or on whether the Commission under President Trump should enforce the Final Rule,” Ferguson added.
With the final rule’s approval, the FTC will have the power to impose financial penalties on short-term rental and live-event ticketing companies that don’t disclose their full price to consumers up-front. The new rule is set to take effect 120 days after Tuesday’s announcement, well after Biden has left office.
Live Nation, the owner of Ticketmaster, the largest concert ticketing company in the US, commended the FTC’s new rule in a statement.
“We’ve led the industry by adopting all-in pricing at all Live Nation venues and festivals and applaud the FTC’s industry-wide mandate so fans will now be able to see the total price of a ticket right upfront no matter where they go to see a show or buy a ticket,” the company said.
The new rule is part of a broader effort by the FTC under Biden’s administration to combat junk fees. In the last three years, the FTC has announced actions against companies like Invitation Homes and Vonage for charging consumersjunk fees.
Bidenspoke of his intentionto crack down on hidden fees in October 2023, when the FTC unveiled the rule’s initial proposal.
“Folks are tired of being taken advantage of and played for suckers,” Biden said during remarks in the Rose Garden at the time. “These junk fees can add hundreds of dollars weighing down family budgets, making it harder to pay family bills.”
In Tuesday’s announcement, the FTC said it estimates the junk fees rule will save consumers up to 53 million hours per year of time spent searching for the total price of live-event tickets and short-term lodging, estimating that the time savings would be equivalent to more than $11 billion over the next decade.
Given that this latest junk fees rule was passed on a bipartisan basis, that may improve its chances of staying on the books during the Trump administration. But there have been other rules that the FTC has finalized in the past year — including aban on noncompete agreements— that have been challenged in court by business trade associations. When those groups prevail, the question will be whether the FTC elects to seek an appeal. If it does not, any rule in question would not take effect.
This story has been updated with additional developments.
CNN’s Jeanne Sahadi contributed to reporting.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.