Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
French luxury giant LVMH has struck a 10-year sponsorship deal with Formula 1, covering its Louis Vuitton, Moet Hennessy and TAG Heuer brands and replacing long-time sponsor Rolex, the companyannouncedWednesday.
The sponsorship deal comes into effect in 2025 and marks a fresh push by LVMH into sports. The company, headed by one of the world’s richest men,Bernard Arnault, paid some €150 million ($166 million) to be the premiumsponsor of the Paris Olympics.
High-end Swiss watchmaker Rolex had been a partner to Formula 1 since 2013.
Luxury players are increasingly seeking to boost brand exposure with events combining hospitality, travel and entertainment.
Related articleAhead of the Olympics, Louis Vuitton CEO says sports embody ‘the DNA’ of the brand
At the Paris Olympics, LVMH and other companies broadened the realm of traditional brand sponsorship, taking part in medals ceremonies, for example.
“For many years, several of our Maisons (brands) have also chosen to invest in Formula 1,” said LVMH Watches CEO Frederic Arnault, adding: “We want to further grow this experiential dimension that Formula 1 provides all over the world.”
LVMH did not provide financial details of the deal.
The company’s sponsorship of the Paris Olympics included its jeweler Chaumet, which designed medals for the event, with each containing an originalpiece of the Eiffel Tower.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.