Archaeologists have unearthed an intricately decorated blue room, interpreted as an ancient Roman shrine known as a sacrarium, during recent excavations in central Pompeii in Italy.
The Italian Minister of Culture, Gennaro Sangiuliano, visited the site on Tuesday, describing the ancient city as “a treasure chest that is still partly unexplored.”
The blue color found in this new discovery is rare, with the culture ministry outlining that it is generally associated with environments of great decorative importance.
An in-depth analysis of the room, according to the ministry, found that the space could be interpreted as a sacrarium or a space dedicated to ritual activities and the conservation of sacred objects.
The walls of the room feature female figures that are said to depict the four seasons of the year, as well as allegories of agriculture and shepherding.
Related articleStunning frescoes of mythological characters uncovered in Pompeii
The new discovery came amid excavations in theRegio IX area of central Pompeii, a residential area that is currently one of the most active excavation sites for new findings.
The excavations are part of a broader project to secure a perimeter between the excavated and non-excavated areas of the archaeological park, which currently has more than 13,000 excavated rooms.
The project aims to improve the structure of the area, making the “protection of the vast Pompeiian heritage… more effective and sustainable,” the culture ministry said.
Other recent findings in the area include furnishings belonging to a house, a bronze kit with two jugs and two lamps, building materials used in renovations, and the shells of oysters that had been consumed.
Last week, it was reported that archaeologists in Pompeii had uncoveredchildren’s sketches depicting violent scenesof gladiators and hunters battling animals.
The drawings, thought to be made by children between the ages of five and seven sometime before Mount Vesuvius erupted in 79 AD, were found on the walls of a back room in the residential sector of the archaeological park.
They showed that even children in ancient times were exposed to extreme violence.
Sign up for CNN’s Wonder Theory science newsletter.Explore the universe with news on fascinating discoveries, scientific advancements and more.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.