The 18,000-year-old body of a near perfectly preservedpuppyhas left scientists puzzled.
Russian scientists discovered the body of thecaninenear Yakutsk, in eastern Siberia. Preserved bypermafrost, the specimen’s nose, fur and teeth are remarkably intact.
Using carbon dating on the creature’s rib bone, experts from Sweden’s Centre for Palaeogenetics were able to confirm that the specimen had been frozen for around 18,000 years, but extensive DNA tests have so far been unable to show whether the animal was a dog or a wolf.
'Puppy dog eyes' have evolved to appeal to humans
“It’s normally relatively easy to tell the difference between the two,” David Stanton, a researcher at the Centre for Palaeogenetics, told CNN.
“We have a lot of data from it already, and with that amount of data, you’d expect to tell if it was one or the other. The fact that we can’t might suggest that it’s from a population that was ancestral to both – to dogs and wolves,” he explained.
We  now have some news on the 18,000 year old#wolfor#dogpuppy.Genome analyses shows it's a male. So we asked our Russian colleagues to name it...Thus, the name of the puppy is Dogor!Dogor is a Yakutian word for "friend", which seems very suitable.pic.twitter.com/epIz8mEpVW
Stanton told CNN that the period the puppy is from is “a very interesting time in terms of wolf and dog evolution.”
“We don’t know exactly when dogs were domesticated, but it may have been from about that time. We are interested in whether it is in fact a dog or a wolf, or perhaps it’s something halfway between the two,” he said.
Further tests might provide more insight into exactly when dogs were domesticated, Stanton said.
Modern dogs are thought to have been domesticated from wolves, but exactly when is unclear – in 2017, a study published in the journalNature Communicationsfound that modern dogs were domesticated from a single population of wolves 20,000 to 40,000 years ago.
Here is another amazing find from the Belaya Gora site!Radiocarbon dating says it 18,000 years old.Question: is it a#wolfcub, or possibly the oldest#dogever found?We are hoping to answer this by sequencing it's genome (it has 43% endogenous DNA).But what do you think?pic.twitter.com/MTZ918GFBf
In contrast, a 2016 University of Oxford study, published in the journalScience, suggested that dogs were independently domesticated twice from gray wolves during the Paleolithic era, once in Asia and once in Europe.
Stray puppy found in rural Australian backyard is actually a purebred dingo
Scientists from the Center for Palaeogenetics said on Twitter that genome analysis had revealed that the puppy was male. They said that, after conferring with their Russian colleagues, they would call the puppy Dogor – meaning “friend” in Yakutian.
The scientists plan to run more genome data tests on the creature to find out more about its origins.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.