Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Ryanair said Monday that it expects airfares during the busy summer travel season to be “materially lower” than last year as the low-cost carrier reported a plunge in profits.
Europe’s biggest airline by passenger numbers, comparable in size to Delta Air Lines in the United States,saidits average fare fell nearly 15% in the April-to-June quarter from the same period in 2023, to €41.93 ($45.65) from €49.07 ($53.42).
Ryanair(RYAAY)attributed that dip in the first quarter of its financial year, in part, to the timing of the Easter break this year, some of which fell over March.
“While Q2 demand is strong, pricing remains softer than we expected, and we now expect Q2 fares to be materially lower than last summer,” Ryanair’s chief executive Michael O’Leary said in a statement, referring to the crucial July-September period. The airline previously thought fares would be “flat to modestly up,” he added.
In a call with investors Monday, Neil Sorahan, the airline’s chief financial officer, said there was “a bit of push back” on fares from consumers, who were spending more cautiously, according to a Reuters report.
Ryanair CEO is critical of Boeing's attention to detail and overall performance. Richard Quest talks to Bianca Nobilo about the airline industry.
Related videoRyanair CEO on Boeing troubles
Ryanair reported a 46% fall in profits in the first quarter of the year, to €360 million ($392 million), despite a 10% rise in the number of passengers.
Shares in the airline were trading more than 15% down at 6.20 a.m. ET, with other European airlines also feeling the chill. Shares in British carrier EasyJet were down 8%, and IAG, which owns several airlines including British Airways, had shed 4.4% by the same time.
Ryanair’s latest forecast for fares contrasts with its warning some five months ago thatit might have to raise themas much as 10% during the summer, partly because of delays in aircraft deliveries bycrisis-hit Boeing.
Boeing has been battling a raft of safety and quality concerns in recent months. In January a piece of fuselage on a 737 Max 9 plane, operated by Alaska Airlines,blew out mid-flight. Since then, further problems have come to light with some 737s, disrupting Boeing’s production schedule.
On Monday, Ryanair said its passenger numbers increased to 55.5 million in the first quarter “despite multiple Boeing delivery delays.” But it also noted that it had seen “an improvement in the quality and frequency” of deliveries from the airplane maker during that period.
For the entire financial year, which runs until the end of March 2025, Ryanair expects its passenger numbers to grow to around 200 million from 184 million — that’s comparable to the roughly190 million passengersthat took Delta flights last year.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.