Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
For travelers getting ready to make their first holiday trips since before the pandemic: prepare for sticker shock.
Airfares are way up. USgas pricesare higher than they’ve ever been at this time of year. Rates for hotel rooms and rental cars have jumped 12% and 46% respectively from where they were in 2019.
The good news is that the prices for airfares, gas and hotel rooms are down from the record highs hit earlier in 2022, but they’re still among the highest on record for this time of year. Only rental car prices are lower than what travelers were paying at the end of last year, although they’re still far above pre-pandemic levels.
Here’s what will cost travelers more this holiday season:
When air travel ground to a near halt in 2020 due to the pandemic, US airlines cut staff throughearly retirement and buyout packages. Staffing is now approaching pre-pandemic levels at most carriers, but the number of flights and seats available haven’t returned to those levels.
Data from aviation analytics firm Cirium shows the number of flights scheduled for November and December is down 15% from the same months in 2019. Many of those missing flights previously were flown by smaller regional carriers serving smaller airports, and some of those airports have sincelost service altogether. But even with a greater percentage of flights on larger planes, the number of seats available is down 3.5% compared to that same period in 2019.
A surge in Covid cases at the end of 2021 depressed demand for leisure travel, but this year it’s positively robust, according to the airlines and industry experts.
“Holiday travel has come back as strong as ever, and leisure travel is why that recovered,” said Scott Keyes, founder of travel site Scott’s Cheap Flights. “So many people wanted to travel over Labor Day and July 4, and as we’re going to see pretty soon, over Thanksgiving and Christmas.”
And that combination — strong demand and a tight supply of seats — means high fares.
The average airfare is up about 40% from 2021, with leisure travelers paying an average of $289 one way, according to an airfare tracker compiled by Wall Street analysts at Cowan.
But it’s not just in comparison to pandemic pricing that fares are higher.
Travel site Hopper says that airfares have risen7% compared to the same period of 2019, and are up 17% when comparing prices for those who waited until a week before Thanksgiving to book a flight.
“Holiday travel is definitely more expensive than we’ve seen in previous years,” said Hayley Berg, chief economist for Hopper.
Of course most holiday travelers never get on a plane —they drive. AAA’s estimate is that 49 million will travel by car over holidays, compared to 4.5 million who fly.  And for those drivers gas prices are a farbigger concern than airfares.
The good news is that price of a gallon of regular gas nationwide is well below the $5.02 record hit in June. AAA reports that the average as of Sunday stood at $4.67, down 27%. And prices continue to fall — the average price is down 11 cents a gallon in just the last week.
Brace for a very busy Thanksgiving travel season
But prices are still 8% higher than this time last year. The price of gas is typically at its seasonal low at the end of the year, frequently just before Christmas.
Even with the annual surge in holiday travel, the amount of driving in November and Decemberis typically well below the summer driving season. And numerous factors are driving oil and gasoline prices to historical highs around the world this year. Prime among them is Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which sparked sanctions on Russian oil. US refining capacity, which fell during the pandemic, has yet to recover.
Sunday’s average price of a gallon of gasis 46% higher than the average price on November 20 over the last 20 years, according to data from OPIS, which tracks gas prices for AAA.
Hotel prices also are more expensive than they’ve ever been this time of year. The Consumer Price Index, the government’s key inflation gauge, shows the cost of lodging away from home hit a record in May, and the October average, the most recent available, is down just 2% from that peak.
Prices are are up 6% from a year ago, and are 12% higher than in October 2019. While CPI does not give dollar averages for the prices it tracks, Hopper puts the average hotel room price at $189 over Thanksgiving weekend and $218 over the Christmas week.
Once again, strong demand and tighter supply — some hotels did not survive the pandemic, others are still scrambling to find the staff they need to fully reopen — is lifting prices.
Rental car companiesslashed their fleetsduring the early months of the pandemic, selling the cars they had to raise cash. With automakers still not back to full production due to a shortage of partsneeded to build cars, including computer chips, it’s taken a while for the rental car companies to replenish their fleets to meet demand.
The good news is that October CPI data shows car rental prices are down 3.5% from where they stood in October of last year, and down 15% from therecord set in June of 2021. Still, rental cars are 46% more expensive than they were in October 2019.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.