Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Disneyland has averted the possibility of the first employee strike in 40 years by reaching a tentative agreement with 14,000 workers on Tuesday.
Approximately 9,500 of those employees whose contract had already expired votedFriday to authorize a strike, which had yet to be scheduled as planned negotiations continued early this week. The bargaining group of four unions, represents workers including ticket takers, candy makers, custodians, retail workers, and ride operators.
After the tentative deal on Tuesday, Disneyland Resort spokesperson Jessica Good said, “We care deeply about the wellbeing of our cast members and are pleased to have reached a tentative agreement with Master Services Council that addresses what matters most to our cast while positioning Disneyland Resort for future growth and job creation.”
“I’m excited, overwhelmed and beyond the moon,” saidCyn Carranza, a Disneyland resort employee.
Union leaders said they will not release details of the tentative agreement until employees have the chance to review and vote on the contract next Monday.
The bargaining committee said in a statement that they had reached this tentative agreement after four months of hard-fought negotiations: “We have shown Disney that we are the true magic makers of the park and today proves that when workers stand together for what they deserve, we win. We look forward to making our voices heard during the voting process to ratify this contract.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.