Content is created by CNN Underscored’s team of editors who work independently from the CNN newsroom. When you buy through links on our site, we may earn a commission.Learn more
Expert-favorite sneakers for walking:Keen Men's WK400
Walking shoes for narrow feet:Brooks Women's Addiction Walker 2
Walking shoes for wide feet:Hoka Women’s Bondi 8
Slip-on walking shoes:Hoka Ora Recovery Slide 3
Walkingcan be an excellent form ofexercisefor people of all ages. But in order to stay healthy, comfy and, most importantly, free from injury, you’ll want to be sure you’re wearing the right pair of walking shoes. Luckily, you have a variety of brands, styles and materials to choose from these days.
To better help you in your quest, we asked multiple podiatrists and seasoned long-distance walkers exactly what to look for when selecting the best walking shoes. We quizzed these experts about how to maximizecomfortas well as what you need to know about foot and ankle health.
Keep reading for their expert-approved shoe picks and how to find the right walking shoes for your needs.
Related articleThe 23 best sandals for men, according to fashion experts (and a podiatrist)
Dr. Miguel Cunha, a podiatrist at New York City’sGotham Footcare, likes these robust shoes. “This walking shoe is designed with a rocker bottom sole to facilitate heel-to-toe movement and a comfortably supportive EVA midsole that springs back with every step,” he says.
“The lugged rubber outsole is durable and thick for increased shock absorption,” Cunha says about this walking shoes from Keen. They are also available inwaterproofandleatheroptions. We love that the women’s sizing is so broad, ranging from size 5 to size 12.
This lightweight, durable shoe is a tried-and-tested recommendation fromJeff Henderson, owner ofFleetFeetin Columbus, Ohio. He calls them a comfortable “do-it-all shoe” suitable for multiple activities.Men’s shoes are available in sizes 7 to 16.
The women’s New Balance 880v14 are heavily cushioned but won't weigh you down. They're also extremely responsive, according to Henderson. They function just as well for long days at work as they do for long walks in the park.
The Addiction Walker 2, which comes in four width options (so those with wider feet can also wear these), is an excellent option for folks with narrow feet. “Known for support and stability, these shoes are also suitable for those with flat feet or overpronation,” saysDr. Mohammad Usman, foot and ankle surgeon and owner of Illinois-basedMichigan Avenue Podiatry.
Not only is this style perfect for slimmer feet but it comes with extra arch support and goes up to a women’s size 12. Plus, “its slip-resistant outsole also adds safety on various surfaces,” Henderson says.
Dr. Mohammad Rimawi, a podiatrist in New York City, recommends the Brooks Ghost range for his patients with narrow feet. He especially likes the most updated version, the Ghost 16. “With a 12-millimeter heel-to-toe drop, stable midsole and wide toe box, this shoe is ideal for everyday walking and can help alleviate stress on the feet,” he says.
The Ghost 16 comes in 15 fun colors for women on Brooks' site, has a cloudlike feel and is made with recycled materials. Bonus: It's certified as aPDAC A5500 Diabetic shoeand boasts the American Podiatry Medical Association (APMA) Seal of Acceptance.
The Bondi 8 is constructed with recycled polyester, and men can choose a regular, wide or extra-wide size. “This shoe's rocker-type structure allows for more natural foot movement, minimizing strain on the foot and calf,” Rimawi says.
Henry J. Rosales, president and CEO ofAmerica's Walking Club, also approves of the Hoka Bondi 8 for comfort. “My preference is Hoka, probably because I have a narrow arch, but I do find that the Hoka Bondi 8 is more comfortable than any other shoe I have worn,” he adds. The women's option only comes in two widths.
Hoka’s Clifton 9 has a wide-fit option to accommodate broader feet.Dr. Michael Galoyanat Metropolitan Podiatry recommends them for maintaining foot health for walkers. This iteration also boasts, like Brooks' Ghost 16, the APMA Seal of Acceptance.
New York City podiatristDr. Emmanuel Fuzaylovalso recommends these for their arch support, breathable materials, firm heel counter and rocker sole.
Related articleThe best slip-on shoes for comfort and exercise, according to experts
They may be a little clunky looking (though in line with theugly slides TikTokcraze), but we love the unisexOra Recovery Slide 3for walking because they are outrageously comfortable and provide tons of cushioning. If you prefer a flip-flop-style slide, Galoyan suggests checking out theHoka Ora Recovery Flip-Flop Sandals. “They provide a soft footbed with enough rigidity to reduce stress on the feet,” he says.
“These sandals are engineered with a meta-rocker sole similar to the bottom of a boat that allows your foot to smoothly roll from heel to toe, minimizing shock on your foot, ankle, knees and back,” Cunha says.
Sara Anfuso, a long-distance walker and content creator based in Seattle, can’t get enough of these Brooks shoes that have a 10-millimeter midsole drop. “I was introduced to them this year, and it’s hard for me to look back because it’s everything I’ve ever wanted in a shoe,” she says. “I love how lightweight they are. They have the perfect amount of bounce to them, so I get the support I need rather than feeling like I’m walking on a cloud.”
“I also love the Brooks GTS technology,” Anfuso says. “I’ve found that it really protects my walking form over long distances and less muscle groups wear out over the course of a day.” This walking-friendly sneaker offers the highest level of cushioning at Brooks and also holds the APMA Seal of Acceptance.
This vegan shoe is sturdy, lightweight and easy on the wallet. It's made with Versarun cushioning that absorbs impact and minimizes pressure for ultimate comfort. They also happen to come with a good grip for all types of terrain.
Cunha recommends these as a great option for walkers on a budget. “These walking shoes are spacious, comfortable and they provide excellent ankle and arch support,” he says.
When choosing walking shoes, there are several factors to consider, like arch support, cushioning, breathability, flexibility, lightweight materials and durability. But experts agree that the most important thing is to find the right support for the terrain you’ll be walking on and to focus on a good fit.
Anfuso suggests that anyone who walks mainly on asphalt should stay away from shoes with heavy treads. “This makes it harder on the body,” she says. “Likewise, make sure you’re opting for shoes with better treads if you’re walking in mostly dirt, gravel, etc.”
If steep hills are your thing,Dr. Meghan Kelly, assistant professor of Foot and Ankle Surgery at Mount Sinai, recommends choosing shoes with better ankle support. “A good, sturdy hiking shoe that extends above the ankle gives more support for hills,” she says. “Going down hills also requires a significant amount of ankle stability.”
To find the right fit when buying walking shoes online,Patricia Jewett, founder ofAll Things Walking, suggests first visiting a shoe store that will measure your feet accurately. “You do want a shoe with some extra room because once you start hiking or walking daily, your feet will swell slightly. There needs to be some room for that to happen,” she says. “You want to leave a little room in the toe area.”
If you’re unable to get a professional sizing, there’s a simple trick you can do at home, according toDr. Nelya Lobkova, a podiatrist and founderofStep Up Footcarein New York City. “Grab a pencil and step on a piece of paper on the floor to trace the outside of your foot,” she says. “Next, put on the walking shoe and trace the outside of the sneaker over the drawing of the foot with a red pen. The red pen marking should encompass the pencil marking at all times.”
Read our review
Note: The prices above reflect the retailers' listed price at the time of publication.
Receive product recommendations, reviews and deals three times a week.
By entering your email address, you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
By clicking 'Sign up', you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
Opt out via thePrivacy Policy.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.