Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Two of Uber’s top executives are leaving the company one month after its lackluster Wall Street debut.
Uber(UBER)confirmed Friday that its chief operating officer, Barney Harford, and chief marketing officer, Rebecca Messina, will depart the company.
In a copy of the email to staff seen by CNN Business, Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi said Harford’s departure comes as a result of the company’s progress over the past two years. “Uber is in a far better spot both internally and externally, I now have the ability to be even more involved in the day-to-day operations of our businesses,” he wrote. “Given this, Barney and I have agreed that the COO role no longer makes sense, and he’s decided to leave Uber.”
Related articleUber says the IRS is auditing two years of the company's taxes
Harford will remain at the company until July 1.
He was brought in by Khosrowshahi in December 2017 to be his right hand man. Khosrowshahi was previously the head of Expedia where Harford worked before becoming CEO of Orbitz, where they then became rivals.
Harford drew controversy during his relatively short tenure at the company. Last July, The New York Times reported that several employees raised concerns about Harford’s alleged racially insensitive comments. In a memo to coworkers shared with CNNMoney last July, Harford described allegations as “painful” and said he was “embarrassed.” He pledged to work with a coach who could challenge his “blind spots.”
As part of the leadership shakeup, two additional executives – one representing the Uber Eats team and the other representing Uber’s global rides business – will report directly to Khosrowshahi.
Related articleUber lost more than $1 billion in the first quarter
Messina had only been on the job for nine months. Khosrowshahi said she’s leaving as a result of a decision to combine its marketing, communications and policy teams into one, which will be led by Jill Hazelbaker, who has been at the company since 2015.
“There’s never really a right time to announce departures or changes like this, but with the IPO behind us, I felt this was a good moment to simplify our org and set us up for the future,” Khosrowshahi wrote.
Uber’shighly anticipated Wall Street debutquickly turned into a debacle when it opened on its first day of trading at $42 a share — below its IPO price of $45. It briefly rose above that price for the first time this week. Uber’s stock dipped slightly in after-hours trading following the news.
The company faces an uphill battle to win over Wall Street investors concerned about its history of steep losses and slowing revenue growth. Additionally, there are broader concerns over the escalating trade war between the United States and China.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.