Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Uber was already thebiggest high-profile IPO bustin recent memory. And it only got worse on Monday.
Shares of Uber(UBER)fell nearly 11% for the day following adismal debutFriday. The stock is now down about 17% from its initial public offering price of $45.
Uber is facing a lot of skepticism about its ability to make money anytime soon as it battles with rival Lyft(LYFT)for market share in the US.
Lyft, which went public in March, has been a Wall Street dud too. That stock fell 6% Monday and is now down more than 33% from its IPO price.
Uber and Lyft weren’t helped by growing trade tension between the US and China either. Thebroader market fell sharply Mondaymorning after China responded to aUS increase on tariffsfor Chinese exports withhigher tariffs of its ownon US goods.
Uber’s epic drop is also bad news for some of the top investors who bought stakes in the company relatively late in the game.
Related articleUber's first investors open up about their wild ride
The company raised about $6.8 billion by selling nearly 140 million shares between December 2015 and February 2017 at a price of $48.77 a share, including a sale of about 71.8 million shares to Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund.
That stake, worth $3.5 billion at the time, is now valued at around $2.7 billion.
Japanese tech investing giantSoftBank is the largest investor in Uber. It owns nearly 13% of the company through its SoftBank Vision Fund. SoftBank’ssharesfell more than 3% in Tokyo Monday following Friday’s drop in Uber’s price.
SoftBank also has investments in several other so-called unicorns that could be close to going public, including Slack, WeWork and DoorDash. Wall Street’s sudden disdain for money-losing startups — Lyft has also fallen dramatically from its IPO price —could be bad news for SoftBank.
And shares of Google owner Alphabet(GOOGL), which owns a 5% stake in Uber, closed down nearly 3% on Monday.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.