Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Europe’s biggest meal delivery firm, Just Eat Takeaway, said on Wednesday it had struck a deal to sell its U.S. unit Grubhub to Wonder for $650 million, sending its shares soaring 20% in early trading.
The Amsterdam-listed company had been looking to offload Chicago-based Grubhub sinceas early as 2022, after acquiring it in 2020 in a $7.3 billion deal amid a pandemic-driven boom in delivery services — a process that was hampered by slowing growth, high taxes and a question of fee caps in New York City.
“Just Eat Takeaway is at last putting an end to its disastrous U.S. journey,” Bryan Garnier analyst Clement Genelot said, noting the group had destroyed more than $7 billion in shareholder value there.
Grubhub’s enterprise value of $650 million includes $500 million of senior notes and $150 million cash, Wonder said in a statement.
Wonder is a food-delivery startup led by former Walmart executive Marc Lore.
Advanced talks between the two companies were firstreportedby the Wall Street Journal on Tuesday.
Just Eat CEO Jitse Groen had in Februarysaidthe M&A environment was not easy in the U.S., where fee caps cost the group some $100 million per year.
Grubhub and U.S. peers DoorDash and Uber Eats have been in alegal battlewith New York City over a law capping how much they can charge restaurants for delivering meals.
JPMorgan said in a note it had argued for an about $1.2 billion valuation for Grubhub in the past, but the market would view the long-awaited deal as positive even at a lower valuation.
The transaction is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2025, and Just Eat said it would not impact itsfull-year guidanceand that it retains no material liabilities associated with Grubhub.
However, analysts said Just Eat might need to exit other markets as well to close the valuation gap with European peers, naming Australia and Canada as options.
Excluding the U.S., Just Eat operates in 18 countries. It exited New Zealand and France earlier this year.
If the gains hold, Just Eat’s shares will see their biggest daily rise since August 2022, wiping out most of their year-to-day losses that stood at 18.1% at Tuesday’s close.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.