Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Walgreens is reportedly looking to take itself private in a deal with Sycamore Partners, sending the stock nearly 20% higher Tuesday.
TheWall Street Journal reportedthat the beleaguered drugstore giant and the private equity firm are discussing a deal that could be completed early next year. Walgreens Boots Alliance (WBA) told CNN it doesn’t comment on rumors and speculation.
Details of the potential deal are still being ironed out. Since Sycamore focuses on smaller deals it “would likely sell off pieces” of Walgreens to make the acquisition more financially manageable, the Journal said.
Sycamore had no comment on the Journal’s report.
Similar to rivals CVS and Rite Aid, Walgreens has closed hundreds of stores and struggled with declining prescription reimbursements in recent years, sending its value plummeting to just around $8 billion from $100 billion a decade ago. Walgreens’ shares are down 60% for the year.
In October, Walgreens announced wasclosing approximately 1,200 locations. About one in seven Walgreens currently open will close its doors by 2027. It currently has nearly 9,000 locations across the US.
Those closures represent a significant escalation from a June announcement when the companyannouncedit was shutting 300 underperforming locations as part of a multiyear optimization program under CEO Tim Wentworth. At the time, the company had said about a quarter of Walgreens stores were unprofitable, and the chain promised “imminent” changes.
Selling to private equity “would be an elegant solution for extracting value for investors,” according to Neil Saunders, managing director of GlobalData. He added that Sycamore could sell off UK chain Boots to “maximize their return.”
Related articleWhy your drug store is closing
“Walgreens is a big company with big problems, and this would be a longer-term investment rather than a way to make a quick buck,” Saunders wrote in a note Tuesday. “Cuts would most certainly be on the agenda, but the pathway to grow would be more challenging as the healthcare, pharmacy and retail sides of the business all have inherent problems that are not easily soluble.”
Walgreens’ closures come amid a difficult time for drugstore chains, which are being hammered on a few fronts. The chains have struggled in recent years because of lower reimbursement rates forprescription drugsand new competition from Amazon, causing their profits to decline.
The front end of drugstores, where snacks and household staples are sold, also face pressure from larger competitors, including Target. Even Dollar General’sgrowth has hurt drugstore chainsin rural areas.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.