Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Business Insider said Thursday that it will cut 8% of its staff, becoming the latest news organization to undergo a round of painful layoffs as news companies struggle to stay afloat amid brutal industry headwinds.
In a memo to staff, Barbara Peng, chief executive of Business Insider, said the digital outlet needed to refocus its priorities and “efforts toward this future.”
Related articleLos Angeles Times slashes more than 20% of newsroom staff as the paper confronts a ‘financial crisis’
“Unfortunately, this also means we need to scale back in some areas of our organization,” Peng wrote.
It was not immediately clear how many employees were affected by the layoffs. Peng said that those impacted will receive a minimum of 13 weeks of pay and medical insurance.
In recent days, a multitude of major news organizations have been forced to cut staffers. The Los Angeles Times slashed its workforce by more than 20% earlier this week and TIME magazine cut dozens of workers. Meanwhile, hundreds of employees at Condé Nast protested planned job cuts.
News outlets have struggled as of late, in particular, due to a poor advertising climate and the rapid deterioration of traditional business models.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.