A study found people with heart problems who stuck with the Mediterranean diet had a 37% lower risk of death
A lot of doctors like the Mediterranean diet because there are a lot of menu options
The Mediterranean diet has been credited with doing everything from helping you lose weight to living longer to improving the health of your brain. A new study, looking at its effect on people with poor heart health, shows that the diet may be a huge help for that, too.
Related articleMore benefits to a high-fat Mediterranean diet, new study says
The observational study was presentedat the European Society of Cardiology conferencethis weekend. It showed that the people who have had a history of cardiovascular disease and stuck closest to the diet had a 37% lower risk of death compared with those who didn’t stick with it.
A Mediterranean diet is one that is heavy on vegetables and legumes, fish, fruit, nuts and whole grains.
Food is cooked in olive oil rather than butter or some other kind of oil. Carnivores can keep poultry and lean cuts of meat on their Mediterranean menu. Red meat, processed food and sugar are off of it.
The diet seems to do even better thanone of the most prescribed options(PDF) for people with heart problems:cholesterol-lowering statins. On average,statins reduce riskof heart problemsabout 24%, according to earlier studies. That means the diet looks like a real winner to help with heart health.
Related articleMediterranean diet wins again, helps bones
A lot of doctors like the diet because there are a lot of menu options with it. It even allows for a glass of wine or beer a day, allowing people to stick with it a lot easier than other diets. The newUS Dietary Guidelinesincluded the Mediterranean diet as one option Americans could use to stay healthy.
Earlier studies showed that people eating the Mediterranean diet have a lower risk ofheart attack and stroke.It may lower yourrisk of cancer,improve yourbone healthand help youlive longer generally.
See the latest news and share your comments with CNN Health onFacebookandTwitter.
Because the new study is only observational, meaning the subjects acted independently, more research will be needed. But if you have a history of heart problems or your family has had heart issues, you may want to make a switch to this diet.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.