Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
The world’s most famous market indicator just suffered its longest losing streak since Jimmy Carter was in the White House.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed lower by 267 points on Tuesday, or 0.6%, down for its ninth-straight day.
The blue chips haven’t closed in the red for nine consecutive days since February 1978, according to FactSet data.
But the recent market slump has been mild, withthe Dowlosing just 3% over the prior eight trading days. That’s barely a blip in the big picture.
Not only that, but the losses have been mostly contained to the Dow.
The Nasdaq, powered by Big Tech and the artificial intelligence boom, is still on fire, though the tech-heavy index ended Tuesday lower by around 0.32%. The S&P 500 was also down Tuesday, closing with a decline of about 0.39%.
“It’s a little quirky,” said Keith Lerner, co-chief investment officer and chief market strategist at Truist Advisory Services. “Money continues to rotate into technology stocks. That’s the dominant theme for this market: AI and technology.”
UnitedHealthcare  Group accounts for a significant chunk of the recent losses on the Dow. The insurance giant has lost 18% of its value so far this month, a selloff that began after thefatal shooting of UnitedHealthcare CEO Brian Thompson. UnitedHealthcare dropped again on Monday after President-elect Donald Trumpvowed to “knock out” drug-industry middlemen.
The Dow’s losing streak comes ahead of Wednesday’s interest rate decision from the Federal Reserve.
Investors widely expect the Fed to cut rates by a quarter point, although officials could signal plans to slow the pace of cuts in 2025.
Despite the recent losses, the blue chips are up by 16% so far this year. Not only that, but the Dow is still about 1,500 points (3.5%) higher than it was on Election Day.
Markets initially surged following the election results, with investors breathing a sigh of relief that recounts and court fights were avoided. There has also been significant enthusiasm for Trump’s promises to cut red tape and taxes.
Related articleDow Jones Industrial Average Fast Facts
“After the election, investors focused only on the good parts of Trump policy. Next year, they’ll have to focus on both the good and the bad,” said Lerner, referring to concerns about Trump’s threats to spike tariff rates and launch mass deportations.
There hasn’t been a losing streak of 10 days or more since an 11-day slump in 1974, according to FactSet data.
“I don’t believe the Dow’s recent losing streak is necessarily a sign of trouble ahead,” said Anthony Saglimbene, chief market strategist at Ameriprise.
Instead, Saglimbene said, the recent losses represents some profit-taking after steep gains in recent weeks.
There’s also been a “modest reset in expectations around the risks and opportunities associated with the incoming Trump administration next year,” he said, “and whether a Trump 2.0 policy agenda can spur the type of growth being priced in to stocks.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.