Since thesummer solsticeback in June, the days have grown steadily shorter and the nights have grown steadily longer in the Northern Hemisphere. But that’s about to reverse itself.
Winter solstice, the shortest day of the year and the official first day of winter, is on Saturday, December 21, this year (well, for the vast bulk of the world’s population anyway). How the solstices — along with thespringandfallequinoxes — work has fascinated curious people for thousands of years.
It’s a day when science intermixes with ancient traditions around the world.
The winter solstice marks the shortest day of the year and the longest night in the Northern Hemisphere, when the sun appears at its most southerly position, directly overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn.
The situation is the reverse in the Southern Hemisphere, where only about 10% of the world’s population lives.
There, the December solstice marks the longest day of the year – and the beginning of summer – in places such as Australia, Botswana and Chile.
The solstice usually – but not always – takes place on December 21. The date that the solstice occurs can move forward or back by a day because the solar year (the time it takes for the sun to reappear in the same spot as seen from Earth) doesn’t match up exactly to our calendar year.
If you want to be super-precise in your observations, the exact time of the 2024 winter solstice worldwide will be 9:21 Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) Saturday, according toEarthsky.organd theRoyal Museums Greenwich.
Below are some examples of when 9:21 UTC will be for various local times around the Northern Hemisphere:
• Yokohama, Japan: 6:21 p.m. Saturday• Bangkok, Thailand: 4:21 p.m. Saturday• New Delhi: 2:51 p.m. Saturday• Baghdad, Iraq: 12:21 p.m. Saturday• Helsinki, Finland: 11:21 a.m. Saturday• Lisbon, Portugal: 9:21 a.m. Saturday• Halifax, Nova Scotia: 5:21 a.m. Saturday• Philadelphia: 4:21 a.m. Saturday• Mexico City: 3:21 a.m. Saturday• Portland, Oregon: 1:21 a.m. Saturday• Honolulu: 11:21 p.m. Friday
To check the timing where you live, the website EarthSky has ahandy conversion tableorplug in your city herein the “Converted Time” box. (Note: Some websites post times that are one or two minutes off from the time set by the Royal Museums Greenwich in England.)
Daylight decreases dramatically the closer you are to the North Pole on winter solstice.
People in balmySingapore, only 137 kilometers or 85 miles north of the equator, could barely notice the difference, with just roughly nine fewer minutes of daylight than they have during the summer solstice. It’s pretty much a 12-hour day, give or take a handful of minutes, all year long there.
Much higher in latitude,Londonstill logs in a respectable seven hours and 50 minutes of daylight to enjoy a chilly stroll along the Thames.
Related article31 of England’s most beautiful places to visit
The difference is more stark in frigidOslo, Norway, where the sun will rise at 9:18 a.m. and set at 3:12 p.m., resulting in a little under six hours of anemic daylight. Sun lamp, anyone?
Residents ofNome, Alaska, will be even more sunlight deprived with just three hours and 54 minutes of very weak daylight. But that’s downright generous compared withPrudhoe Bay, Alaska. It sits inside the Arctic Circle and won’t see a single ray of sunshine.
Because Earth is tilted on its rotational axis, we have changing seasons. As the planet moves around the sun, each hemisphere experiences winter when it’s tilted away from the sun and summer when it’s tilted toward the sun.
Scientists are not entirely sure how this occurred, but they think that billions of years ago, as the solar system was taking shape, the Earth was subject to violent collisions that caused the axis to tilt.
It’s no surprise that many cultures and religions celebrate a holiday – whether it be Christmas, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa or pagan festivals – that coincides with the return of longer days.
Ancient peoples whose survival depended on a precise knowledge of seasonal cycles marked this first day of winter with elaborate ceremonies and celebrations. Spiritually, these celebrations symbolize the opportunity for renewal.
“Christmas takes many of its customs and probably its date on the calendar from the pagan Roman festivals of Saturnalia and Kalends,” Maria Kennedy, assistant teaching professor in the Department of American Studies at Rutgers University, told CNN Travel in an email.
Saturnalia started on December 17 and Kalends started on January 1, said Kennedy, who specializes in Christmas studies.
Citing academic research, Kennedy said early founders of the Christian church condemned the practices of these holidays, but their popularity endured. Christian observance of Christmas eventually aligned around the same time in the calendar even though there’s no specific date set in the Gospels for the birth of Jesus.
Here’s more on a few of those ancient customs:
In the Welsh language, “Alban Arthan” means for “Light of Winter,” according tothe Farmers’ Almanac. It might be the oldest seasonal festival of humankind. Part of Druidic traditions, the winter solstice is considered a time of death and rebirth.
Newgrange, a prehistoric monumentbuilt in Ireland around 3200 BC, is associated with the Alban Arthan festival.
In Ancient Rome, Saturnalia lasted for seven days. It honored Saturn, the Roman god of agriculture.
The people enjoyed carnival-like festivities resemblingmodern Mardi Gras celebrationsand even delayed their war-making. Slaves were given temporary freedoms, and moral restrictions were eased. Saturnalia continued into the third and fourth centuries AD.
It’s not just ancient Europeans who marked the annual occasion. The Dongzhi Winter Solstice Festival has its roots in ancient Chinese culture. The name translates roughly as “extreme of winter.”
They thought this was the apex of yin (from Chinese medicine theory). Yin represents darkness and cold and stillness, thus the longest day of winter.
Dongzhi marks the return of yang— and the slow ascendance of light and warmth. Dumplings are usually eaten to celebrate in some East Asian cultures.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.