Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
America’s most popular vehicle is going electric. Ford will make an all-electric plugin version of the F-150 pickup truck.
“We’re going to be electrifying the F-series — battery electric and hybrid,” Jim Farley, Ford’s president of global markets, said at a Deutsche Bank conference in Detroit Wednesday.
The company isn’t giving any details on the truck yet, including when it will go on sale.
Related articleFord redesigns 'world's most popular SUV'
Tesla plans to make an electric pickup truck and some start-up companies, like Michigan-basedRivian Automotive, have announced plans to make them as well.
Ford’s F-series trucks, which include the F-150, have been thebestselling vehicle in Americafor four straight decades. The trucks account for about a third of Ford’s sales and an even greater share of the company’s profits. Besides basic work versions, the trucks are also available with options and features that make themrival luxury cars in both opulence and price.
Ford had previously announced it would make ahybrid version of the F-150. The all-electric truck would be in addition to that.
Ford also plans to make an all-electric version of the Transit van, Farley said.
“There’s so much diversity in there that there are some subsets of customers who would love an all-electric version of those vehicles because of the cost of ownership and the duty cycles” Farley said during an interview with CNN at the New York Auto Show in March. Ford would not confirm at that time, however, that an electric F-series truck was actually planned.
Related articleFord unveils its most powerful Mustang yet
The trucks would work well for customers who don’t need to travel long distances in a single day, but could still tow and haul without using any gasoline or diesel fuel.
Ford’s long experience in the business and its brand recognition among truck buyers would give it a major advantage over competitors like Tesla, Farley said last spring.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.