Content is created by CNN Underscored’s team of editors who work independently from the CNN newsroom. When you buy through links on our site, we may earn a commission.Learn more
A parent-favorite travel system stroller:Nuna Tavo Next Stroller and Pipa RX Travel System
A budget-friendly travel system stroller:Graco Modes Nest Travel System
A midrange travel system stroller:Chicco Corso LE Modular Travel System
A travel system stroller for multiple children:UppaBaby Travel System Vista V3 Stroller and Aria Car Seat
Welcoming a newborn into the world and raising them is tough enough; choosing the besttravel system strollershouldn’t add to the stress of parenting. While a travel system stroller might sound like something reserved for your family’s first beach vacation or road trip with multiple stops, it’s a parenting essential that’s crucial for everyday use.
A travel system is a stroller and car seat combo, which you typically purchase together. This allows you to have just one setup where the two items fit perfectly together, and for the most part, no adapters are needed. More simply put, just one purchase can take care of two expensive necessities for your new baby. Besides, many times, purchasing a stroller system can be less expensive than buying them separately.
Though alightweight travel strolleris great for travel, a full-size stroller is better suited for your everyday needs, especially when it allows for a car seat to easily snap on and off the stroller for easy access when getting in and out of the car. The car seat can snap right into a base in your personal vehicle, or you can use a regular seat belt to secure your car seat in a taxi or rental car. Just remember, the car seats that come with travel system strollers are commonly known as infant bucket seats, and your child will most likely grow out of them between 8 and 15 months of age, depending on the car seat’s specifications and factors like your child’s height and weight.
These strollers are also robust and often can be used without a car seat when your little one is just a few months old, due to the common full-recline feature. Having a stroller with a generous recline offers the perfect napping position for a baby or toddler on the go, and with large weight limits, these strollers can then grow with your child into toddlerhood and for many years thereafter.
When it comes to air travel with these systems, many of them includecar seats that meet the Federal Aviation Administration’s requirementsto be used on an airplane and you can always check the stroller with the rest ofyour luggage. Depending on the size of the stroller, you may even be able to gate check it and enjoy the convenience of having it to navigate a large airport.
While these systems won’t necessarily fold down to allow you to throw the stroller inyour travel backpackor in the overhead bin — yes, those types of strollers do exist — the stroller will grow with your child and provide supreme versatility and maneuverability.
If you have the budget, the luxurious, modern and user-friendly Nuna Tavo Next Stroller and Pipa RX Travel System is one of the best options available. “The car seat weighs just 7 pounds and it’s baseless, so it installs without its base in seconds,” says Jennifer LaBracio, senior gear editor atBabylist. “The Tavo stroller has a huge storage basket, four-wheel suspension and a compact fold considering its size.”

With a trifold seat, the stroller has a slimmer fold than most other travel systems on this list and will also stand on its own when folded. The stroller also offers ventilated seats, a zip-out canopy and a magnetic buckle. The included car seat features a large canopy too — this one made from a breathable merino wool blend — and the car seat base has a steel-enforced stability leg for a safer fit. Additionally, the stroller is compatible with all of Nuna's Pipa car seats if you’d prefer to combine it with a different car seat option.


“My overall pick is the Chicco Corso LE Modular Travel System,” LaBracio says. “It’s a great combo. Both the stroller and the car seat included are high quality and easy to use at an affordable midrange price point.” She calls out numerous features that make it a smart investment, like the suspension (she prefers large, foam-filled tires), a modular seat with full recline for extended naps, a footrest for added comfort and a large storage basket to easily schlep the whole family’s belongings.

LaBracio notes the included car seat, the KeyFit 35, is a parent favorite. “As a child passenger safety technician, I love the safety features too,” she says. “It’s so easy to install, and it has a high rear-facing height and weight limit so you can rear-face longer than many other seats.”
If you’re looking to save a few bucks without skimping on quality, the Graco Modes Nest Travel System is an excellent option under $400 with loads of practicality and safety features, according to LaBracio. “The stroller converts to a bassinet so you can use it with your baby from birth and you can click in the car seat as well,” she says. “The infant car seat is easy to install and has an anti-rebound bar, which is an added safety feature that helps absorb impact in the event of a crash.”
LaBracio recommends this well-priced travel system stroller for its robust suspension and baseless car seat, “which means you can install it directly into your vehicle with the base using the built-in Latch connectors.” She notes most infant car seats use a Latch connector located on the base and not integrated into the seat itself like this one, making the Joie system super convenient. You’ll also appreciate that the stroller seat can also convert into a lie-flat bassinet, so it’s ready to use the moment the baby is born.
Uppababy travel system strollers are the gold standard of essential baby gear, both for their intuitive designs and helpful safety features. CNN Underscored copy editorDanielle Poieszloves this travel system for its ease of use and sturdy construction, not to mention its ability to keep the most precious cargo safe and comfortable.
The Vista V2 has an impressive all-wheel suspension, all-terrain wheels and multiple recline and seating options, while the Mesa V2 car seat is equipped with an adjustable headrest with side impact protection, has various handle positions including an anti-rebound setting and uses the popular Latch system. You’re also getting an incredibly generous storage compartment that’ll allow you to run errands while safely stowing your baby’s gear.
A unique twist? This one comes with a separate bassinet that can be snapped in with a simple click, keeping your newborn snug as a bug during your first walks together. Poiesz even used the bassinet, which is safe for overnight sleep, withUppaBaby’s bassinet standto keep her little one next to her bed for the first several months. And the stand canconvert to a hamperwhen baby moves to a crib — talk about versatile!
Uppababy is constantly innovating on its strollers and baby gear, so they’ve gone and made a near-perfect travel system stroller, well, even better. “If you’re up for a splurge and have more than one child or plan to grow your family soon, I like the UppaBaby Vista V3 Stroller and Aria Car Seat Travel System,” LaBracio says. “The stroller grows with your family. It can fit up to three kids in various configurations and is a pleasure to push, steering easily with one hand. The car seat is the lightest on the market at just 6 pounds.”
For a more affordable option than UppaBaby, Ashlee Neuman, content director and baby gear expert atThe Bump, points us to the Evenflo PivotSuite Modular stroller and LiteMax car seat. “The lightweight car seat has an anti-rebound bar and an easy-to-grip handle while the stroller can be quickly folded from both a parent-facing or forward-facing position,” she says. “Best of all, thanks to a built-in adapter, you can transition from the infant car seat to the toddler seat in one smooth motion, no extra parts or tools required.”
The Chicco Bravo Trio offers an easy-to-use travel system where the car seat snaps right into the stroller base with or without the regular seat attached. This unique option allows you to lighten the total stroller weight if you want to. Though, by keeping the regular stroller seat attached, you can use the canopy of both the stroller and car seat to fully keep out the sun. The fabrics are machine-washable and there’s an adjustable handlebar. The stroller will also stand up on its own with a one-hand close.

The included car seat base is very easy to install, with a bubble indicator and Latch connectors. You will find, however, that the car seat has slightly lower height and weight limits than some other car seat options at 30 pounds or 30 inches in height.
If you like this stroller but are looking for a slightly upgraded model, you can instead opt for theChicco Bravo Primo Trio Travel System. Although more expensive, the stroller upgrades include treaded rubber tires with a foam core, a four-panel extendable canopy with a pull-out visor and the KeyFit 35 Zip car seat.
The Britax B-Free is one of those strollers that will last forever, as it can fit a child up to 50 pounds. While this weight limit far exceeds when most children outgrow a stroller, even elementary-age children sometimes don’t mind being pushed around during a trip to a large city or evenDisney World. And for younger children, this means a roomier seat to move around.

The stroller also features an incredibly large sun canopy, seven storage pockets and six different handlebar positions. The stroller is easy to close with a one-handed fold. The system comes with the B-Safe Gen2 Flexfit Car Seat, which offers a steel-reinforced frame, side-impact protection and energy-absorbing foam.
Finally, a travel system stroller that’s actually compact and durable enough to withstand the trials of your busy itinerary and compact trunk or overhead space. This travel-friendly bundle comes with the mom-favorite Bugaboo Butterfly, a 16-pound travel stroller that’s lightweight enough to maneuver and click open and close with one hand. Suitable for air travel, it’s the perfect option for toting your little one around the terminal and throughout your trip with ease. The under-seat basket is generous enough to store baby’s travel essentials with a weight capacity of around 18 pounds.
This handy bundle comes with the adapters required to fasten the included Bugaboo Turtle Air Shield by Nuna car seat, should you decide to rent a car during your travels or enjoy the bundle at home. At under 9 pounds and complete with a five-point harness system and a sun-protective canopy, it’s a smart and safe investment whether near or far from home.
The City Mini GT2 is Baby Jogger’s high-end stroller, featuring a stylish and easy-to-maneuver frame with all-terrain rubber tires that provide a smooth, bump-free ride for you and your baby. The stroller is built to last, which is ideal since it has a generous weight limit of 65 pounds. The stroller features a comfortable seat with adjustable calf support, an incredibly large canopy with two peekaboo windows and a one-handed fold.
The travel system stroller comes with the Baby Jogger City Go 2 Car Seat, which features a one-hand adjustable headrest with no-rethread harness, a quiet canopy and even a taxi guide loop for easy installation without the base. Additionally, the car seat base uses the easy-to-install Rapidlock technology and an anti-rebound bar to provide extra safety.However, to connect the car seat to the stroller, you’ll need adapters, but you can keep them on the stroller at all times without getting in the way, even when the car seat isn’t in use.
The Maxi-Cosi Zelia 5-in-1 Modular Travel System can fit your child from infancy either with the click-in car seat option or the lie-flat pram configuration. The stroller seat also offers versatility with its forward- or rear-facing design. No matter what you choose, your little one is guaranteed ample protection from the elements with the extended sun canopy featuring mesh panels for ventilation. The handlebars are height-adjustable, which works well for all caregivers pushing the child, and it comes with a cup holder to stay hydrated on the go. The one downside is that this is a two-step and two-hand fold, which may be difficult if you’re juggling many other bags or a child with your other hand.
Included in this travel system is the Maxi Cosi Mico 30 Infant Car Seat, which has become extremely popular due to its energy-absorbing foam, side impact protection and no added fire-retardant treatment.
Keeping up with your cardio routine with kids can pose a challenge, but not with this unit. If you’re looking for a basic jogging stroller travel system without needing all the bells and whistles, the Baby Trend Expedition Jogger Travel System is a great choice, especially since it comes with an easy-to-attach car seat. The stroller offers a multiposition recline with a large canopy and storage basket, a parent tray with two cup holders and a foam-padded push handle. The stroller features a 12-inch front and 16-inch rear all-terrain bicycle tire, where the front can lock for easy jogging. The travel system comes with the EZ Flex-Loc Infant Car Seat too, which can fit a child from 4 to 30 pounds and up to 30 inches tall.
When shopping for a travel system stroller, Neuman says you can opt to buy a stroller and car seat bundled together or purchase a stroller and car seat separately and double-check that they’re compatible. “If you buy a set from [the same] brand, you may be able to connect the car seat to the stroller without having to rely on adapters. On the other hand, buying them individually lets you select the exact stroller and car seat you want, which is important because each piece of gear should fully meet your family’s needs, whether you’re using them together or separately.”
“Travel systems are all about convenience,” LaBracio says. “Since you’re going to be using your stroller longer than your infant car seats (most babies outgrow their infant car seats by about 1 year old), I recommend prioritizing a travel system that comes with a stroller that meets your family’s needs.”
Because you’ll be lifting the car seat in and out of the car and stroller, Neuman says to choose “something lightweight with an easy-to-grip handle that releases smoothly from the stroller frame.”
LaBracio lists numerous travel stroller system elements worth considering, like a quick-folding mechanism, a good suspension to absorb shock, a large storage basket should you be the type to run errands or carry loads of belongings with your little one in tow, and an adjustable handlebar to keep them safe and secure at any size. “You can start narrowing down your search, then be sure the paired car seat works with your vehicle and has the features you want,” LaBracio says.
Neuman recommends considering additional features like an extra-large UPF sun canopy that’ll benefit your baby when you’re taking sunny walks in the stroller, a load leg and anti-rebound bar to help keep baby safe on car rides, a quick and easy folding mechanism to get you in and out of the car faster, and good quality, generously sized wheels that feel easy to maneuver in all terrains.
The following FAQs have been answered by baby gear experts Ashlee Neuman and Jennifer LaBracio.
A travel system is a car seat and a stroller that attach to each other. It’s sometimes also referred to as a car seat-stroller combo. A travel stroller is just a stroller with no car seat included. It’s lightweight and more compact than a traditional stroller, and it usually folds more easily, making it convenient to use during travel, to bring on planes or to use when you’d rather not carry a heavy stroller.
Instead of moving your baby out of the car seat and into the stroller seat once you get to your destination, you can connect the car seat directly to the stroller frame with your child still in it and be on your way. It saves you a bunch of time and hassle, and lets your little one keep sleeping undisturbed. If you’re planning an upcoming trip with an infant, having a lightweight, compact stroller that can accommodate a car seat is particularly useful since it minimizes the gear you need to carry.
A wide range of stroller types can be configured as a travel system, from lightweight travel strollers that are best used on smooth pavement to rugged jogging strollers that are built to handle rough terrain. Many lower-priced options lack suspension and have plastic wheels, which leads to a bumpy ride over anything other than smooth pavement. This isn’t ideal if you live in a more rural area with dirt or gravel paths or even a big city with uneven sidewalks. More expensive strollers, like the Chicco, Nuna and Uppababy, have foam or air-filled tires and suspension, providing a smoother ride across more terrains.
For this article, we consulted the following experts to gain their professional insights:
CNN Underscored editors thoroughly investigate all products we cover and provide full transparency about how we source them. We have a skilled team of writers and editors who have many years of product testing and recommendation experience and ensure each article is carefully edited and products are properly vetted. We talk to top experts when relevant to make certain we are testing each product accurately and speaking about the pros and cons of each item.
For this article, we spoke to two baby gear experts about their favorite travel stroller system as well as how to find the perfect option for you and your family.Marissa Miller, the writer of this article, is a new mom who also used her experience testing and regularly using numerous stroller brands to identify the best travel system strollers worth investing in for an easier time navigating the world with your baby.
Read our review
Read our review
Note: The prices above reflect the retailers' listed price at the time of publication.
Receive product recommendations, reviews and deals three times a week.
By entering your email address, you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
By clicking 'Sign up', you agree to ourTerms of Useand acknowledge thePrivacy Policy.  CNN and itsaffiliatesmay use your email address to provide updates, ads, and offers.
Opt out via thePrivacy Policy.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.