Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Entertaining the King of England is an expensive business, France is finding out.
A sumptuous lobster dinner held to welcome Britain’s King Charles III to Parislast September cost the French president’s office nearly €475,000 ($515,000), according toaccountspublished on Monday by France’s public auditor.
The lavish affair at the Palace of Versailles, which saw around 180 guests tuck into afeast of blue lobster, crab cakes and champagne-marinated chicken, helped blow an €8.3 million-sized hole ($9 million) in the Élysée Palace’s budget last year, the auditor said.
Related articleMacron pulls out all the stops for King Charles III’s rescheduled state visit to France
The watchdog, which is responsible for scrutinizing presidential finances, including spending on staff, security and diplomatic duties, said the Élysée Palace’s expenses had topped €125 million ($136 million) during 2023 — up 14% from the previous year.
The overspend was part of a much bigger French government budget deficit in 2023, which has just earned the country a rap on the knuckles from the European Union.
The state dinner included outlays of more than €166,000 ($180,000) for catering and €42,000 ($46,000) for drinks, on top of other costs including furniture, flowers and table decorations.
King Charles and his wife, Queen Camilla, attended the banquet as part of a three-day state visit to France, which had been postponed from earlier in 2023 because of widespread protests over Macron’s pension reforms. During the trip, King Charles praised the “indispensable relationship” between the UK and its neighbor in a historic speech to the French senate chamber.
Mick Jagger, Hugh Grant and former French football manager Arsene Wenger were among the famous faces at the state dinner, which was held in Versailles’ glittering 240-foot (73-meter) long Hall of Mirrors — where, according to thepalace’s website, France’s ill-fated monarchy once threw balls, weddings and entertained foreign dignitaries.
The audit office is now playing the role of party pooper, warning that “significant efforts will need to be undertaken from 2024 in order to restore and sustain the financial balance of the presidency.” It noted that another state dinner, thrown for Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi last year in the Louvre, came to €412,000 ($447,000).
The European Union handed France an official warning last month over its budget deficit, which stood at 5.5% of gross domestic product last year — one of the highest among the 27-member bloc. France’s national debt has also ballooned to nearly 111% percent of GDP.
The Élysée Palace did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.