Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Delta Air Lines is planning to furlough 1,941 pilots in October as the airline industry struggles to rebound from coronavirus-related fallout.
“We’ve said before that early retirements alone wouldn’t solve the pilot overstaffing situation caused by the Covid-19 pandemic,” said John Laughter, senior vice president of flight operations, in an internal memo to employees. Delta(DAL)provided the memo to CNN Business.
Laughter said the company may be able to “avoid or reduce” the furloughs if cost-reducing agreements are able to bemade with their union, and if the CARES Act is extended.
“While it’s possible, it is far from certain and we must continue to take the necessary steps to manage the business. It’s vitally important for Delta’s recovery that we reduce our size considering the prolonged and uncertain road ahead,” he said.
The federal bailout known as the CARES Act is set to expire at the end of September. Thebailout prohibited the airline industryfrom employee layoffs, involuntary furloughs or pay cuts. Delta received $5.4 billion in grant funds and unsecured loans from the CARES Act, according toan SEC filing.
The airline currently has 11,200 active pilots, according to the memo. Laughter projects the company will need roughly 9,450 pilots for the summer 2021 schedule, which he says Delta expects to be the peak flying period for the next year or so.
Deltawarned employees back in Mayof potential employee cuts.
“We are simply overstaffed, and we are faced with an incredibly difficult decision,” Laughter said.
Along with other airlines,Delta urged employeesto take advantage of buyout and voluntary exit programs, one which included a retirement package for employees who have worked at Delta for more than 25 years. Despite employees opting into these programs, Laughter noted it wasn’t enough to prevent furloughs.
Since the pandemic hit, Delta says only 25% of revenue has been recovered.
“Though we expect a multi-year recovery, we will work diligently to bring you back to Delta as soon as we can, if demand recovers better than we are anticipating,” Laughter said.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.