Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Feeling hungry for a new job?
Favor, a Texas-based food delivery company, is looking for a voracious eater to sample tacos all over the state as their first-ever “Chief Taco Officer.” The lucky employee will receive $10,000 in exchange for taste-testing tacos and documenting the experience on social media during June and July, according to thejob listing.
You could earn $100 an hour -- just by binging true crime
The Chief Taco Officer will drive across Texas, staying in each city for two days and eating tacos delivered by Favor for at least two meals, so you can have tacos for breakfast and dinner. The winning candidate will receive free food, accommodation, and transportation along their journey and free delivery from the company for a year.
Interested eaters can create a video application and submit a short form onFavor’s websitebefore May 12.
“Tacos are one of the top favored foods across all of the cities we serve throughout Texas,” said Jag Bath, Favor’s CEO, in a statement shared with CNN.
“The history and culture behind one of the most iconic foods in the Lone Star State vary from city to city, and we’re excited for our new Chief Taco Officer to discover some of the best and most authentic tacos out there.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.