Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Employers are planning to increase their salary budgets by 4.6% next year, the highest expected annual jump in 15 years.
That’s according to the latest international survey from consulting firmWillis Towers Watson, which included responses from 1,550 US employers. The survey was conducted from October 3 to November 4.
A large majority of the organizations attributed the big bump to inflation and a tight labor market.
But withheadline inflationstill at 7.7%, any raise an employee gets below those levels effectively means they will be earning less because their paycheck won’t buy as much.
Oftenwhat companies expect to pay more for a given year and what they end up paying differs based on market conditions. This year, for instance, 70% of organizations surveyed by Willis Towers Watson said they spent more than they originally planned. Overall, employersended up spending 4.2% more on salaries this year than in 2021.
Employers indicated they will use a host of ways to fund bigger salary increases next year:21% said they would reassess their total rewards package to ensure it has the biggest impact on retention and engagement; 17% said raise prices; and 12% saidrestructure and reduce headcount.
How employers will distribute the additional funding for salaries won’t be even across the board.
What will my take-home pay be?
Some workers will get much higher than the average. It will depend on several factors, such as employee performance and the going market rate for a position, which may require upward adjustments for existing staff. Newpay transparency lawswill add to the pressure to offer those adjustments.
And, as always, those whose skills are most in demand are likely to see the biggest pay hikes, said Carolina Valencia, a vice president in the human resource practice at Gartner. “Certain jobs will get a disproportionate share [of the salary budget increase] because they are critical or difficult to hire for.”
Gartner is expecting even larger pay increases next year. Its survey of employers, conducted in September and October, found that organizationsin North America expect to offer merit increases of 7% on average.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.