Skiers, take note.
Lesssnowis falling worldwide, according to analysis of data gathered since 1973 by the European Union’sCopernicus Climate Change Service. The Northern Hemisphere’s middle latitudes (the area north of the tropics and south of the Arctic) are seeing the most notable decline.
Last winter, ski resorts in places such as Austria, Vermont, Switzerland and Spain’s Sierra Nevada region had unexpectedclosuresbecause ofunseasonably warmwinter temperatures.
“In the United States, winters are now 2.3°Fmilderthan a century ago,” said Bob Henson, a meteorologist and journalist withYale Climate Connections. “Although heat waves are a huge risk with summer warming, winters are warming even more dramatically than summers in many areas,” he said.
In some ski areas, the effect has been drastic.
Once the world’s highest ski resort at over 17,000 feet (5,180 meters), Bolivia’s Chacaltaya now sitsabandonedafter a glacier melted away. And a small ski area inLe Sambuy, France, recently closed for good because of a lack of snow.
“The world’s warming winters are especially devastating for ski areas at lower elevations or in other settings that are just barely warm enough,” Henson said.
This state that booms in summer might be even better under the snow
Planning a ski vacation requires some careful consideration for optimal conditions.
“As a general rule, the highest-altitude resorts – including several in the Colorado Rockies and the Western Alps – will have the most reliably cold weather and the longest snow seasons, since they’re less dependent on periodic Arctic intrusions in order to stay cold enough for snow,” said Henson.
And while high-altitude areas can suffer from prolonged dry periods, the ability to make snow can lessen the impact on ski conditions, he said. However, snowmaking has a “substantial carbon footprint,” he pointed out.
As with any especially weather-dependent trip, balancing priorities can be tricky.
“We are really careful about what we say to clients when they ask for snow-sure resorts,” said Sarah Plaskitt of ski travel websiteScout Ski.
“Everyone always wants village charm and high altitude and ski-in, ski-out. But charm comes from being old and traditional, and they didn’t build villages right up in the high-altitude slopes hundreds of years ago, nor did they design those villages around ski resorts.”
It’s easy to obsess about snow before you arrive. All that matters is what the snow is like the moment you are putting on your boots.
Sarah Plaskitt of Scout Ski
Plaskett recommends places such as Zermatt, Val d’Isère and Méribel  – popular ski resort towns in Switzerland and France – that have charming villages as well as access to higher-altitude slopes.
“It’s easy to obsess about snow before you arrive,” she said, and for some people, that obsession starts months in advance of a trip.
“All that matters is what the snow is like the moment you are putting on your boots,” she said. “Even if the snow is really bad, we rarely get complaints as everyone just ends up having a great time anyway.”
From Europe and Japan to Alaska and Utah, read on for some of the highest likelihoods for snowy slopes for a ski vacation this winter. (Just keep in mind that great snowfalls in previous years don’t 100% guarantee great snow this season.)
The ski season usually runs from late November to late-April at Alaska’s largest ski resort,Alyeska, located just 45 minutes from Anchorage in the Chugach Mountains and the resort town of Girdwood.
The slopes here – including what’s billed as the longest continuous double black diamond ski run in North America, on the resort’s North Face – see an average of382 inches(about 970 centimeters) of annual snowfall, lending new meaning to steep and deep.
And the best news for skiers who suffer from altitude sickness? You’re only 2,300 feet (about 700 meters) above sea level where the cable car drops you at the top of Mount Alyeska, which means you can score all the big mountain ski thrills and powder without the potential altitude effects that can be an issue at much higher resorts.
The Swiss mountain town known for the Matterhorn is one of thebiggest ski areas in the worldand has the highest cable car station in all of Europe, too, at over 12,700 feet (about 3,870 meters).
You can usually ski year round inZermattatop a glacier atMatterhorn Glacier Paradise, where 13 miles (21.1 kilometers) of groomed runs offer views spanning some of France, Italy and Switzerland’s highest mountains in addition to the Matterhorn’s iconic peak.
Zermatt’s car-free village does alpine charm in a big way, especially when you’re staying at central spots such as the grande dame hotelMont Cervin Palace, open since 1852, or the stylishSchweizerhof, both just steps from the town’s cable car and train station.
Ski resorts in Whistler and Banff are no slouches in the snow department. But don’t overlookWhitewater Ski Resortalong Canada’s Powder Highway in the Selkirk Mountains of British Columbia, which sees some of Canada’s snowiest skiing conditions, too.
The resort gets roughly 222 inches (about 564 centimeters) of annual snowfall,according to OntheSnow.com, across more than 3,200 acres of total skiing terrain with a season that usually runs from December into April.
Stay close to the mountain at the affordableAlpine Inn & Suites(rates start around$90 per night, converted from CAD to USD) in the artsy mountain town ofNelson, which claims to havemore restaurants per capitathan foodie hot spots such as Vancouver and San Francisco.
Part of the3 Vallées(the largest connected ski area in the world), France’sVal Thorenstakes the title of the highest ski resort in Europe, at an elevation of over 7,500 feet (about 2,285 meters).
The slopes here usually stay open well into May, with an average snowfall of more than201 inches(about 510 centimeters) and over 90 miles (145 kilometers) of runs to schuss down.
Inside Turkey’s ‘hidden’ ski world
You can take some of the stress out of all the moving parts of a ski trip by making it an all-inclusive vacation when you stay atClub Med Val Thorens Sensations, where kids 3 and younger stay free and your ski pass, group lessons and meals and drinks are all wrapped into the price.
A popular destination for keen Australian skiers and other intrepid powder hounds from Japan and abroad, Hokkaido island usually gets about a whopping1,500 centimeters(590 inches) of snow a year thanks to Siberian winds that lash the region with light and dry powder.
It makes for predictably epic ski conditions at spots such asHanazono NisekoandRusutsu, to name just a couple of Hokkaido’s over 100 ski resorts.
You’re not doing skiing in Japan correctly, of course, if you’re not spending time recuperating from the slopes in an onsen. One of Hokkaido’s best hot springs can be found south of Niseko and Rusutsu atNoboribetsu, a historical spa town known for its mineral-rich waters.
Last ski season, 13 of 15 Utah ski resorts broke all-time records for snowfall. But the fairest among them might beAlta Ski Area, just a 45-minute drive southeast of Salt Lake City in Utah’s Wasatch Mountains and consistently ranked among North America’s top ski resorts for snowfall, with an average of about 546 inches (1,387 centimeters) accumulating annually, according to Alta.
Alta’s 2022/2023 season was the resort’s snowiest on record, with 903 inches (2,294 centimeters) of the white stuff.
Plan to visit midweek for fewer crowds and to score lodging deals atSnowpine Lodge, where the onsite Stillwell Spa beckons for après-ski of the wellness variety and is housed inside a historic mining industry building with its original granite walls.
South Lake Tahoe saw its snowiest season on record last year, withKirkwood Mountain Resortleading the resort pack with more than 700 inches of snow (1,778 centimeters).
It was an unusually epic season for the mountain, to be sure (although average snowfall at Kirkwood is a none-too-shabby343 inches– about 871 centimeters). But the resort’s high base elevation of 7,800 feet (about 2,375 meters) — and its peak elevation of 9,800 feet (nearly 3,000 meters) — make it a reliable, snowy favorite for skiing in the Sierra Nevada.
Breckenridge, Aspen, Steamboat and Vail often take the spotlight in Colorado. But for the ski resort that’s often the snowiest in the state, head to Southwest Colorado andWolf Creek Ski Area, where OntheSnow’s figure for average annual snowfall stacks up at 319 inches or 810 centimeters (compared to an average of 234 inches in Vail).
You can stay on the mountain, just a few miles from the slopes, at the no-frillsWolf Creek Ranch Ski Lodge, where rooms and cabins with full kitchens start from around $200 per night.
The outdoorsy town ofSouth Fork, along the Rio Grande River about 19 miles away from the ski resort, is a good base for snowmobiling trips into the surroundingRio Grande National Forestand has breweries, pizzerias and barbecue joints for low-key, après-ski fun.
Terry Wardis a Florida-based travel writer and freelance journalist in Tampa who learned the hard way about T-bars and snowboards in the French Alps.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.