Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Three varieties of “fire chicken” instant ramen noodles popularized by a viral internet challenge have been recalled in Denmark after they were deemed to be too spicy.
The level of capsaicin found in Buldak Hot Chicken Ramen 3x Spicy, Buldak Hot Chicken Ramen 2x Spicy and Hot Chicken Stew was so high that it could poison consumers, the Danish Veterinary and Food Administration said ina statementissued Tuesday.
Capsaicin is a spicy, naturally occurring chemical found in chili peppers.
South Korean noodle giant Samyang, which developed the ramen, said on Wednesday that the products were not being recalled because of quality issues.
It’s “because it is so spicy that it could cause problems,” a spokesperson told CNN. “This is the first time they’ve been subject to (a) recall for this reason.”
The Danish regulator didn’t say whether the recall was prompted by a specific incident. It urged consumers to discard the products or return them to where they were purchased.
Instant noodles originated in Japan but have become a staple across Asia. Samyang bills itself as having produced South Korea’s first instant ramen in 1963, when the country was mired in post-war poverty and needed cheap, accessible sources of food.
Samyang was the country’s third largest noodle maker after Ottugi and Nongshim by sales in 2022, the latest year for which information was available,according toNICE Information Service, a research firm.
Buldak, which means “fire chicken” in Korean, was developed by Samyang’s chief executive, Kim Jung-soo, a housewife who married into the family business and eventually took over.She toldThe Wall Street Journal in January that she was inspired by a spicy stir fry.
The noodles were launched in 2012 and popularized on social media by influencers touting the “Fire Noodles Challenge.” In March, rapper Cardi B reignited the craze with aTikTok video.
According totaste testers, the original buldak ramen scored around 4,000 on the Scoville scale, which is roughly equivalent to the heat of jalapeños. Some of the new flavors may be two or three times as hot,they have said.
CNN’s Antonia Mortensen contributed reporting.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.