Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Editor’s Note:Sign up forCNN’s Meanwhile in China newsletterwhich explores what you need to know about the country’s rise and how it impacts the world.
Tesla has announced aggressive price cuts in China and Germany, shortly after reducing prices in the United States, as the world’s largest maker of electric vehicles (EV) faces declining sales and growing competition in major markets.
The latest round of price cuts adds to aseries of price cutsthat Tesla has made dating back to early last year to try to maintain demand in the face of increased competition from EV offerings by traditional automakers and higher interest rates driving up the cost of car purchases for many buyers. Tesla’s price cuts havesqueezed its profit marginsand caused its stock to fall about 4% in trading Monday, ahead of its first quarter earnings report due out after the bell Tuesday.
On Sunday, the EV giant slashed the starting prices of fourmodels sold in mainland China, its largest overseas market, by 14,000 yuan ($1,932). The Model Y, the company’s bestselling car in the country, now starts at its lowest -ever price of 249,900 yuan ($34,502).
In Germany, Tesla’s biggest market in Europe, the price of its Model 3 rear-wheel drive was also lowered by 2,000 euros ($2,132) to 40,990 euros ($43,707), according to its official website.
The first cuts were announced on Friday in the US, when Tesla reduced theprices of three of its five models. The prices ofthe Model Y, Model X and Model S were cut by $2,000each, while those for the Model 3 and the Cybertruck remained unchanged.
The flurry of cuts comes during a tough time forTesla. Its stock has plunged more than 40% year-to-date, after it reported a drop in quarterly deliveries for the first time in nearly four years andannounced job cutsequivalent to more than 10% of its global staff.
On Saturday, Tesla CEO Elon Musk said hehad postponedhisplanned trip to India, citing “very heavy” obligations at the company. He was due to arrive in the country this week for a visit that was expected to include a meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and confirmation that Tesla will build a factory in the world’s most populous country.
In China, the largest EV market in the world, Tesla’s price cuts are expected to exacerbate an existingprice warin a highly competitive sector.
Related articleWhat’s wrong with Tesla?
On Monday, Chinese EV maker Li Auto (LI), led by billionaire entrepreneur Li Xiang, responded by announcing it was cutting the prices of all four of its models with immediate effect. Its Li Mega, which it says is the world’s largest passenger EV, now sells for 30,000 yuan ($4,142) cheaper.
The American company was already facing stiff competition there.
Tesla wasbriefly dethroned by China’s BYDas the world’s bestselling EV brand in the fourth quarter of last year. Compared with Tesla, BYD’s cars are more affordable.
Its entry-level model sells in China for the equivalent of just below $10,000. In contrast, Tesla’s Model 3, its cheapest model, currently costs three times more at 231,900 yuan ($32,017) in China following Sunday’s price cut.
China’s EV price warstarted in October 2022, when Tesla cut prices to boost sales as consumers slashed spending in a slowing economy. Almost all major manufacturers,including makers of gasoline vehicles, followed suit, impacting the entire auto industry’s profit margins.
The competition continues unabated in 2024, with more than 30 major car makers announcing further price cuts.
On Friday, XPeng, the Guangzhou-based EV maker, said it would offer 500 million yuan ($69 million) worth of subsidies for buyers who snap up four of its models.
In March, BYD lowered the starting price of its most affordable EV, the Seagull hatchback, by 5% to 69,800 yuan ($9,670). Later that month, Xiaomi, the smartphone manufacturer,joined the EV raceby launching its SU7 sedan to take on Tesla.
CNN’s Chris Isidore contributed to this report.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.