Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
A key borrowing rate for American consumers has jumped to a level not seen in months.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year US Treasury note breached 4% on Monday for the first time since August. The yield was at 4.026% as of 3 pm ET on Monday after reaching as high as 4.033% earlier in the day, according to Tradeweb.
That is extending a jump in the 10-year yield last week after ablowout September jobs reporton Friday led investors to recalibrate their expectations for how much the Federal Reserve will cut rates this year.
Since the stronger-than-expected report, traders have raised their bets that the Fed will ease rates by a quarter point in November and December, according to the CME FedWatch Tool. The 10-year yield closed at 3.98% on Friday, up from 3.85% on Thursday.
Higher-for-longer rates are likely to put pressure both on companies and everyday Americans. The 10-year yield tracks the rate on everything from mortgages to student loans to car loans, leaving consumers looking to borrow for big-ticket purchases with elevated costs.
“With investors growing more confident in an outlook in which job creation continues, growth remains robust and inflation moderates more slowly, the Fed is now seen easing policy at a more gradual pace than expected only a week ago,” wrote Karl Schamotta, chief market strategist at Corpay Cross-Border Solutions, in a Monday note.
Data out this week couldprovide hints on where the Fed will take rates this year. Investors will parse the Consumer Price Index report for September and wholesale inflation figures. While inflation has cooled enough that the Fed has turned its attention to maximizing employment,some investors worrythat a still-hot jobs report could make it more difficult to bring inflation down to the Fed’s 2% target.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.