Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
OnlyFans, a popular subscription-based website known for its sexually explicit content, is now blocked in China after a period of being accessible.
Social media users posting on X had noticed the site was working in late November, which checks by CNN were able to confirm.
Beijing generally blocks access to thousands of websites at any given time, including those that host pornography, which is illegal in the country. The government has adopted a zero-tolerance policy toward sexually explicit content.
News that OnlyFans was accessible in China had been welcomed online earlier this month. Users posting on social media platform Weibo were joking that the government was offering job opportunities for fresh graduates struggling in a grim employment market, suggesting they could start selling content on the site.
“Isn’t this another measure to provide employment,” said one post.
“This is a good company that gives creators 90% of the income! Isn’t it better than actual work??” said another.
The unemployment rate for people in the 16-24 age group, excluding students, measured 17.1% in October, slightly less than the high released in August, according to official figures. China’s youth jobless rate hit record highs last year before the data was suspended and reintroduced using a different methodology.
And even though OnlyFans is best known for sexual content, some creators post music or fitness videos. Last year, it launched a porn-free online streaming service featuring comedy- and sports-oriented shows.
Correction: An earlier version of this article misquoted the organizationGreatFire.Orgin saying OnlyFans became unblocked on November 29. GreatFire says the site had been accessible since it was first tested in July, 2020. GreatFire’slatest datashows the website has been blocked since December 11.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.