Notre Dame, the treasured Gothic gem in Paris that went up in flames in 2019, will officially reopen Saturday.
Immediately after the fire, French President Emmanuel Macron made the ambitious pledge to restore the church within five years.
On Friday, he praised hundreds of artisans, carpenters and other specialists for helping him “keep this promise” during his final site visit.
“You did it. And it’s an immense source of pride for the entire nation. I’m infinitely grateful to you, France is infinitely grateful to you,” Macron said.
Here’s everything you need to know about the days ahead.
On April 15, 2019, Notre Dame was engulfed in flames. The cause of the blaze remains a mystery. Investigators say it was likely an accident – perhaps a burning cigarette or an electrical malfunction.
France – and much of the world – despaired as the 860-year-old cathedral’s roof caved in, strewing the stone floor below with soot. Macron called it a “terrible tragedy,” and pledged to rebuild the landmark church “because it is what our history deserves.”
Some of the country’s richest businessmen pledged hundreds of millions of euros towards the restoration.
After more than 2,000 days’ work – involving 2,000 people, 2,000 oak trees and 2,000 features restored or rebuilt – the world got its first glimpse of “Our Lady of Paris” last week, as the French president toured the restored landmark with his wife, Brigitte, and a cluster of clergymen.
The official reopening begins with a ceremony on Saturday, followed by eight days of special masses and prayers.
The guest list will be long and illustrious, but the most notable attendee will be Donald Trump. The US president-electannounced this weekhe will travel to Paris – his first overseas trip since last month’s election – for what will be “a very special day for all.”
The ceremony is expected to draw some 50 heads of state and government.
One noteworthy absentee, however, will be Pope Francis. The pontiff will travel to the French Mediterranean island of Corsica on December 15, just days after the reopening, but is skipping a visit to the capital. A leading French archbishop said the “star” of the ceremony ought to be Notre Dame itself, and that the pope did not want to distract from the occasion.
Some 170 bishops from France and around the world will also be involved in the ceremony, along with one priest from each of the 106 parishes in the Paris diocese.
Macron will give a speech in front of the cathedral at around 6 p.m. (12 p.m. ET). The Archbishop of Paris Laurent Ulrich will then strike the closed cathedral doors with his crozier, an ornate staff.
Once the doors open, the cathedral “responds” to the knock by singing Psalm 121 – which begins “I will lift mine eyes unto the hills” – three times. After this, the doors will open.
The ceremony then proceeds in three parts. First, the “awakening” of the great organ – the largest in France, comprising 8,000 pipes and 115 stops. Second, the “chanting of the office” – a series of psalms and prayers, including the Lord’s Prayer. Then, the archbishop will give a final blessing and the choir will sing Te Deum, a Latin hymn.
The service will be followed by a broadcast by France TV, chronicling the cathedral’s rebuilding.
The inaugural mass will be held Sunday morning at around 10.30 a.m. (4.30 a.m. ET), with Macron in attendance. After blessing the holy water, the archbishop will sprinkle it over the congregation and then the altar.
The biblical readings given at mass will be the same the world over, marking the second Sunday of Advent.
A second mass will be held on Sunday evening, which will be open to the public.
For the eight days after the reopening, masses will be held twice daily, along with special evening ceremonies. Many of these services will be open to the public.
On December 17 and 18, the cathedral will host concerts of Johann Sebastian Bach’s “Magnificat.”
The cathedral expects to welcome up to 15 million visitors each year. For now, visiting remains free. Guests will be able to book a free ticket online and access the building either on the same day or one or two days after booking.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.