Sign up for CNN’s Adulthood, But Better newsletter series.Our seven-part guide has helpful hints for paying off student loans, negotiating your salary, building credit, and more.
The holidays are often a time when financial goals are in opposition with showing people love in the grandest of ways.
Reining in holiday spending could be the absolute last thing people want to do,but during inflation-anddebt-related financial struggles, scaling back is a necessity for many. Thankfully, there are ways to celebrate Christmas without breaking the bank.
“People really have to keep it in perspective,” said Tawra Kellam, one of the authors behind the blogLiving On a Dime to Grow Rich. “It’s about celebrating with family. It’s about taking time off work and having fun together. And even doing little things for Christmas can make it special.”
Related articleWhen body image woes come wrapped in a bow
With the following tips on how to enjoy Christmas decorations, gifts, meals and activities for little to no cost, this Christmas can be undoubtedly unique but rich with meaning and joy. The main concepts are seeing what you have with new eyes, thinking outside the box and learning how to find the best deals.﻿
Having a festive home is a seasonal mood booster, and repurposing items around your house as decorations is one way to start.
“If you can only do something small to make it special, that’s enough,” said Melissa Riker, the creator ofThe Happier Homemaker blog. “It’s the little things that are fairly easy and inexpensive to do that can add that special touch.”
If you don’t have old decorations, try deciding on a color theme then perusing your house for anything in those colors. “You might not think about them as they’re scattered through the house,” Riker said, “but if you bring them all together — put them on your mantel or add them to the centerpiece of your coffee table — you can really make a beautiful layout.”
That’s using creativity instead of money, said Jodie Kammerer and Julie Lancia, the creators ofThe Design Twins blog. If you’re not the creative type, ask your stylish friends — in person or virtually — toscan your rooms and intuit what you could use. You might also find inspiration from what social media users share under the hashtags#budgetdecorand#DIYChristmas.
Shop from nature in your backyard, neighborhood or park, or while hiking. “Clip some pine needles or pine branches,” Riker said. “Even just plain branches without leaves can look really pretty if you put glitter on them and they look like ice branches.” Out of garden herbs, pine cones, mistletoe and holly, flowers, and bush or tree clippings, you could make a table arrangement, wreath or garland.
Related articleAs we head into the holidays, here are 5 things to know about food recalls
At stores selling Christmas trees, “ask for the clippings that they throw away,” Lancia said. With a bow or burlap tied around it, “it’s immediately a Christmas decoration.” Some of these stores also sell wreaths they have constructed out of clippings for only several dollars each.
Take advantage of sales and coupons at craft stores, vintage stores, thrift stores and dollar sections, which likely have inexpensive decorations in bulk, DIY projects and boxes of 12 candy canes for $1. “I have decorated entire trees just with things from different dollar stores,” Riker said. “They have actually a lot of decorations that, when you combine them all together, can look really high-end.”
Instead of buying Christmas ribbons, you could purchase fabric and cut it into strips, using that to form your ribbons instead. And “if you’re putting ribbon on a Christmas tree, you don’t need to have a whole spool to wrap around it,” Riker said. “You can take shorter strands and tuck it in so it looks like it’s weaving in and out of the tree.”
A strand of twinkle lights may be all you need to make a space look festive, Kammerer said. If you have children, make the preparation more fun by getting “your little elves to work,” Lancia said. They can craft paper chains and snowflakes, garlands out of cranberries and popcorn, andChristmas cookie ornaments.
For a Christmas tree, look for discounts at craft stores, grocery stores, tree farms or hardware stores. Pre-lit trees may be less expensive than buying trees and lights separately. And don’t think that you have to use ornaments.
“One of my favorite things is a natural element tree,” Lancia said. “You’ve gathered your pine cones at the park. Now you’re going to spray paint them a glittery silver” and put them on the tree, in a bowl or on your table or mantel.
Related articleOne small thing you can do for healthier food and exercise over holiday travel
If you have a printer, look online for freeprintable decorations. “That is a really, really easy way to change up your decor without spending any money at all,” Riker said.
Gift giving can be monetarily stressful if that’s how you want to cheer people upafter a tough year, but frugal alternatives could show that appreciation, too.
“Everybody doesn’t need a gift; everybody doesn’t want a gift,” said Judy Woodward Bates, “The Bargainomics Lady” behind hereponymous blogand author of “A Bargain to Die For.” “Don’t get all upset because you can’t afford to buy gifts for everybody, because the purpose of Christmas is just to let each other know how much you care about each other.”
Those who want to keep up tradition can try the followingfor gift givingor alternatives:
Related articleAre scented candles bad for you? What the science says
To find the best bargains, options include:
If you’re embarrassed about giving less this year, “fess up,” she said. “You will see the relief on other people’s faces, because it just takes one to be willing to say, ‘I’m strapped this year.’ Because most of these other people, when you just say that, will admit, ‘Hey, I’m in the same boat you are. Thank goodness you had the courage to speak up because I wanted to say it, but I was just afraid of how people would react.’”
Gift giving can get more complicated when you realize you’ll need wrapping materials, too — but by having realistic expectations and thinking outside the box, you can wrap gifts in creative and attractive ways, Kellam said.
You can:
With a few tips and tricks, you can still have a fancy feast this season.Cooking from scratchinstead of buying prepared foods is one way to reduce costs.
Some grocery stores have seasonal donation programs wherein customers buy a prepared bag of nonperishable, traditional holiday foods, which is donated to a food bank where people in need can pick them up. Check around for such programs if you’d like a holiday meal or visit a food bank for food in general.
Related articleAfter 30 years of not eating meat, I’ve made some unexpected discoveries
Some neighborhoods have discount grocery stores, and dollar stores have snacks, boxed dessert mixes, frozen and canned foods, and Christmas candy.
You could also stretch your food budget by reducing the number of appetizers and sides, or finding pared-down versions of traditional recipes. Brooklyn Farm Girl, a cooking and gardening blog, has an online collection of30 Christmas dinner recipesthat you can make with less than $10.
Limited funds may have changed your holiday traditions, but you can still throw an entertaining, memorable holiday. You could:
Being more intentional about how you celebrate Christmas this year may make the holidayall the more special. And learning how to bargain and celebrate with less can have long-term impact on your life and approach to holidays even once you’re more comfortable financially.
“It’s a fun game to use our creativity and make everything,” Lancia said, “and then also feel good about not needing to shop and not needing to spend money to make a fresh and festive home. ”
CNN’s Sandee LaMotte and Katia Hetter contributed to this article, which was updated from a 2020 story.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.