Editor’s Note: Vincent Doumeizel is senior Adviser at United Nations Global Compact on Oceans and director for the Food Programme for the Lloyd’s Register Foundation. He is also guest editor of CNN’s Call to Earth series. The views expressed in this commentary are his own.
Seaweed might be the greatest untapped resource we have on this planet.
It can be a nutritiousfood, an alternative to plastic, restore our oceans and couldeven help tackle climate change. But while there are12,000different types of seaweed, we know how to cultivatefewer than 30. If we’re to make the most of this miraculous plant-like algae, we must learn to love it and learnto grow it sustainably.
Today, our land-based food systems are contributing to global warming and biodiversity loss, butmore than 800 million peopleare starving. Meanwhile, oceans cover more than two thirds of our planet, but they contribute less than 3% of our total food calories, according tosome estimates.
We can change that paradigm by encouraging seaweed cultivation. Seaweed is super-fast growing, it doesn’t need land, nor pesticides and it doesn’t need to be watered. It’s also packed withprotein, nutrients, fiber, vitamins and minerals.
What’s more, dried, seaweed retains its nutrients. A nutritious product with a long shelf life and no need for cold storage on its journey to the consumer is good news, both for emerging economies, where refrigeration during transport is not always available, and for our climate, because it saves on the carbon emissions that come from keeping perishable produce fresh.
But despite its huge potential, seaweed cultivation is currently largely limited to Asia, which is responsible for98% of the 35 million metric tonsof seaweed sold worldwide.
If we want to establish a resilient seaweed market elsewhere, the world needs to embrace it as a food. And there is huge potential for its cultivation. Globally, seaweed could be farmed across an area of oceanalmost the size of Australiaand provide enough food for 10% of human diets by 2050, according to a study led by University of Queensland in Australia.
But even when humans don’t eat it, seaweed has other benefits for food production: it can beused as a naturalbiostimulant for plantsthat canreplace fertilizers, and as a feed for animals, withsome researchsuggesting it can reduce the amount of planet-heating methane emitted by cattle.
Beyond food production, seaweed offers a host of other environmental benefits.
It has been used to create alternatives to plastic packaging that are biodegradable and compostable,and even edible.
Some companies are using it as analternative textile to cotton, a plant that uses huge quantities of land, water and pesticides.
It also has potential as a scalable, nature-based solution for tackling climate change. As it grows, seaweed draws down carbon dioxide – and it can grow at an astonishing rate.Giant kelp can grow up to50 centimeters a day, reaching heights ofaround 60 meters.
Can seaweed help solve the world’s plastic crisis?
There has beensome investigation into the potential of seaweeds as a carbon store, and although more is needed,one studysays that seaweed habitats are believed to be the most productive of all coastal vegetated ecosystems, and suggested that the world’s seaweed sequesters as much carbon as all the planet’s seagrass meadows, saltmarshes and mangroves combined.
What’s more, seaweed can help restore and regenerate our oceans. It absorbs pollutants such asheavy metals and nitrates, and it encourages biodiversity in our oceans by providing a critical habitat for marine life, and a place for smaller creatures to evade predators.
But just as we are recognizing its untapped potential, seaweed is becoming increasingly vulnerable. California, Norway and Tasmania have all lostmore than 80% of their kelpin recent years, the result of climate change, pollution and overfishing.
Environmental hero’s mission to save the most over-fished sea in the world
We urgently need to protect, replant and cultivate these ecosystems or they will disappear.
I have three kids, and they need to hear solutions to the environmental problems facing our planet. Seaweed can be one of them.
If we learn to sustainably cultivate our ocean, we can contribute to feeding the entire global population while mitigating climate change and restoring biodiversity. But it can only be done together. So, if you think of seaweed as slimy, smelly and unsexy, it’s time to think again. It’s part of our future.
“The Seaweed Revolution,” by Vincent Doumeizel and translated by Charlotte Coombe, published by Legend Press, is on sale in the US now.
Editor’s Note: Call to Earth is a CNN editorial series committed to reporting on the environmental challenges facing our planet, together with the solutions.Rolex’s Perpetual Planet initiativehas partnered with CNN to drive awareness and education around key sustainability issues and to inspire positive action.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.