Editor’s note: Sign up forUnlocking the World, CNN Travel’s weekly newsletter. Get news about destinations, plus the latest in aviation, food and drink, and where to stay.
Anyplace can throw up a few lights and call it a holiday celebration, but travelers who really adore Christmas want more.
They want a place whereChristmas marketsbeckon, lights dazzle in all directions,holiday feastsoffer endless temptations and Yuletide traditions such as Advent are longtime, serious business.
FromEnglandto the Philippines, these 15 places around the world traditionally offer up some of the best holiday atmosphere for a Christmas-drenched vacation:
While popular lore would have us believe the North Pole is the official home of Santa Claus and his jolly missus, the Finns would have us believe otherwise.
For them,Rovaniemi is Christmas HQ, located just north of the Arctic Circle in Lapland. Children here make gingerbread cookies with Mrs. Claus, enroll in Elf School or take a calligraphy class and compose their Christmas wish lists with a traditional quill.
You may also want to visit theRanua Wildlife Park, home to baby polar bears, wolverines and moose.
The Arktikumis a science center where the mystery of the northern lights is revealed.  Those in search of a truly frosty experience can stay in theArctic SnowHotel, made entirely of snow and ice, but equipped with saunas and hot tubs in which to thaw.
Colombia’s high-altitude capital brightens up each year with Christmas lights galore.
In Bogotá, there’s the tradition of “Ruta Navideña,” or the Christmas Route. Celebrants stroll popular spots around the city to take in the dazzling displays.
Día de las Velitas(Little Candles’ Day) is celebrated on December 7, which is the eve of the Immaculate Conception. It officially marks the start of Christmas in Colombia. People light small candles and paper lanterns, placing them on windowsills and balconies.
Christmas is sweet here.Natillais a custard dish that resembles a flan or pudding and is eaten alongside other festive favorites such asbuñuelos(fried dough balls served hot).
There’s a travel bonus to coming to Bogotá at Christmastime: It’s thebeginning of the dry season.
Close to big cities Philadelphia and New York City, Bethlehem offers a smaller Christmas escape.
Settled in the 1700s by Moravian colonists, Bethlehem is justifiably proud of itsLive Advent Calendar, which can be enjoyed starting at 5:30 p.m. from December 1 to 23.
It is a free, family-friendly event in which a town crier rings a bell up and down Main Street to call visitors to the Goundie House (the oldest house on Main Street). A child from the crowd is invited to come knock three times, and then a local business comes out with a surprise for everyone.
“The Christmas City”also has horse-drawn carriage rides,holiday libations, historic tree displays and decor aplenty. They’ll even have a screening of that heartwarming Christmas classic “Die Hard,” among other movies.
This historic city in southwest England celebrates both the birth of Jesus and the birth of Jane Austen with plenty of fanfare.
The Jane Austen Centre– and on-site Regency Tearoom – is the best place to learn about the city’s most famous onetime resident.
The Theatre Royal, which Austen mentions in “Northanger Abbey” and “Persuasion,” has a varied program of holiday drama, musicals, opera and concerts.
TheBath Christmas Markethas a multitude of wooden chalets selling distinctively British handmade crafts in a quaint Georgian setting. Straddled between the imposing Bath Abbey and the venerable Roman Baths, the market offers a festive way to discover the character of this historic city.
Bath on Iceis a great excuse to bundle up and lace up skates.
If Asia were to have a Christmas capital,San Fernandoin the heavily Roman Catholic Philippines would be a top nomination.
The city, northwest of Manila, is renowned for its Giant Lantern Festival, which starts on December 14 and ends January 1. San Fernando’s lantern-making tradition dates back to the late 18th century.
The highlight of a visit here is theparol, a colorful, electric Christmas lanternthat symbolizes the Star of Bethlehem. The parols recall psychedelic kaleidoscopes, brilliant stained glass windows, prismatic pinwheels or oversized snowflakes.
Visitors who can manage to extend their holiday until the 12th day of Christmas – akaThree Kings Dayor Epiphany – can catch up with Melchior, Gaspar and Balthazar in Barcelona.
On the evening of January 5, the kings (also known as the “three wise men”) arrive in bearded and velvet-robed splendor at the city’s port via ship.
Cannons are fired, fireworks are set off, and as the mayor hands them the keys to the city, the magic of the Magi officially commences.
They parade through the streets in a magnificent cavalcade of floats that includes camels, elephants, giraffes and dazzling costumes.
The magic of Christmas is in the holiday chaos of the Kenyan capital.
Visitors will find boisterous carol music playing in different languages at various stores, on public transportation and in the long lines at restaurants and supermarkets.
A visit to a friend’s house or popular eatery might mean a plate heaped withchapati(flat bread), a spicy rice known aspilauand grilled meat – ornyama chomain Swahili – just to name a few.
Revelers can burn off the calories with a hike at the scenicKarura Forest Reserve, a haven for outdoor enthusiasts made popular by Nobel laureate Wangari Maathai. IconicNairobi National Parkoffers safari options for visitors to see rhinos, lions, giraffes, and other animals within a backdrop of the sprawling city.
For Christmas gifts, the bustling open-air markets such asMaasaioffer authentic African paintings, jewelry, clothes and fabrics unique to Kenya.
TheNuremberg Christmas market(Nürnberger Christkindlesmarkt) is a German institution, traditionally pulling in more than 2 million visitors each year. It has a lot of history behind it –its first known written mentiondates to 1628.
In“the little city of wood and cloth,”visitors to market booths can find traditional, often handmade Christmas decorations, wooden toys and all sorts of food and drink.
Adults can enjoy Nuremberg spicy gingerbread and mugs of mulled wine. And for families with the kids along, there’s theToy Museum.
While December is off-season, this heavily Roman Catholic island in the Mediterranean Sea has a festive and spiritual vibe at Christmas.
Visitingpresepju, or Nativity scenes, is an integral part of Christmas here. Every year, residents proudly open their shutters, and sometimes even their garage doors, to display their holy crib confections to the public.
Downtown Valletta is home to a lively holiday spirit, with carolers singing outside the Baroque St. John’s Co-Cathedral during Advent. See a dizzying display of Christmas lights on Republic Street.Fairylandabounds with holiday attractions.
A visit to the privately ownedMalta Toy Museum, featuring dolls, soldiers, train sets, and clockwork tin trinkets dating as far back as the 1790s, is a heartwarming homage to childhood.
A haven for environmentally friendly, outdoor enthusiasts, French-speaking Quebec City bustles with winter activity, offering holiday programs for all tastes.
Old Quebecis turned into a picturesque Christmas village. Sausage and roasted chestnut lovers can browse the wares at the German Christmas market. The more religiously inclined can wander a display of Nativity scenes from around the world.
The nearbySentier des Caps de Charlevoixoffers family-friendly hiking, snowshoeing and skiing. Speed devils can zoom around in a snowmobile fromNord Expe.
Can’t make it for Christmas? There’s still theQuebec Winter Carnivalfrom February 7 to 16, 2025.
Piñatas,posadasandponchesum up the festivities in this colorful town in central interior Mexico, where Christmas is both a solemn and celebratory affair.
Leading up to December 24, visitors are likely to stumble upon Mary and Joseph strolling the streets, as locals make pilgrimages from home to home, singing to beg for“posada” (or “shelter”) as they reenact the journey to Bethlehem.
Piñatasandponche(a mulled fruit drink) cap a long evening of peregrinations around this cobblestoned city, designated aUNESCO World Heritage Sitefor its wealth of grand churches, well-preserved architecture and grandzocalos.
Get aschedule of Christmas events here.
Birthplace of Mozart and filming location for “The Sound of Music,”Salzburgis chocolate-box perfect. Think snow-capped mountains, baroque architecture and traditional Christmas markets.
It’s even the home of “Silent Night.” The popular hymn was performed for the first time in nearbyOberndorf bei Salzburgon Christmas Eve 1818.
The town also plays host to a more unusual Yuletide tradition.
Across Austria and Bavaria (in nearby Germany), people dress up as a terrifying Alpine beast known as Krampusand rampage through the streets in search of naughty children in need of punishment. TheKrampus runs in Salzburgare held on various dates in December.
Get the French and German flavors of Christmas in this border city that feels the influences of both cultures. Dating back to 1570, Strasbourg claims to bethe oldest Christmas market in Franceand one of the oldest in Europe.
Strasbourg’sseries of themed Christmas villagesmorph the city into a visual and gastronomic wonderland. Hundreds of stalls are spread out in numerous locations.
Make photographic and visual memories with a roughly 30-meter (100-foot) tall Christmas tree that is brought to the central square of Place Kléber each year and decorated with ornaments and lights.
Alongside the traditional market, there’s theOFF alternative Christmas fair, featuring live music and a street art trail.
The traditional Christmas colors of red, green and white take on an entirely new meaning in New Zealand.
Here, red represents thepōhutukawa(New Zealand’s ruby-red flowering Christmas tree). White represents the pristine sandy beaches. And green? The kiwi, of course!
Sun-lovers who want to join Santa in his surf shorts should definitely head toQueenstown, where warm summer temperatures mean folks can jetboat, river surf or paraglide on Lake Wakatipu.
Or visitors can simply set up camp along the lakefront and enjoy a hearty Christmas meal of lamb, seafood and chicken on the barbie.
Rockefeller Centerlies at the core of the New York Christmas. Its famed ice rink has been around since 1936;the decorated treehas been a holiday tradition since 1931.
Nearby Radio City hosts the annual Christmas Spectacular, starringthe Rockettes.
On the southwest corner of Central Park,Columbus Circlehosts more than 100 vendors selling clothes, gifts, snacks and drinks at the Holiday Market.
Fashion’s biggest labels join in the festivities, making appearancesin elaborate Christmas window displays at Bergdorf Goodman, Saks Fifth Avenue,Macy’s Herald Square flagship storeand other department stores.
Roseann Lake, Laura Ma, Faith Karimi, Maureen O’Hare and Al Gerard de la Cruz contributed to this article from past reporting.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.