Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Right-wing media mogul Rupert Murdoch tied the knot Saturday for the fifth time, according to British tabloid newspaper the Sun.
The Sun, which is owned by Murdoch,released photosof the 93-year-old Australian billionaire alongside his 67-year-old wife, retired molecular biologist Elena Zhukova, at his vineyard in Bel-Air, California, where the ceremony took place.
Zhukovais the mother of Russian American art collector Dasha Zhukova, the former wife of Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich.
Murdoch sat for decades at the helm of Fox Corporation and News Corp, two media companies with outlets that include the Wall Street Journal, the New York Post and Fox News.
Murdoch, who has a net worth of $9.77 billion according to Bloomberg’s Billionaire Index, announced in November 2023he wouldstep down as chairmanof both organizations, handing the reins over to his son Lachlan. Murdoch at the time maintained he would continue an “active role” in News Corp and still serves in the capacity of chairman emeritus of the two companies.
He began dating Zhukova last summer, according tothe New York Times. The couple announced their engagement in March.
Murdoch was most recently married to former supermodel Jerry Hall. The couple divorced in 2022.
In March 2023, Murdoch proposed to Ann Lesley Smith but the engagement was called off two weeks later.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.