Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Royal Mail could ditch its near-daily deliveries of letters as the centuries-old British institution attempts to modernize its service and plug a growing hole in its finances.
Ofcom, the UK regulator overseeing the postal service, publishedproposals to rescuethe beleaguered company Wednesday. It said Royal Mail could save as much as £650 million ($828 million) a year if it cut letter deliveries to three days a week from the current six.
The company’s business model is “getting out of date” and risks becoming “unsustainable” as people send fewer letters and receive more parcels, Ofcom said.
The number of letters sent via the Royal Mail network had halved since 2011, and financial losses have ballooned.
Among its other proposals, Ofcom suggested that Royal Mail could save up to £200 million ($255 million) a year by cutting its letter deliveries down to five days a week, or by extending the time it takes to get mail to customers.
“Something’s got to give, or the service is going to be too costly, and either stamp prices will go up or it will become unsustainable,” Melanie Dawes, Ofcom’s chief executive,saidin an interview with the BBC Wednesday.
Related article‘Truly sorry.’ Fujitsu says it will compensate UK postal workers who were ruined by its software
Any changes to Royal Mail’s Monday-Saturday letter delivery schedule would need to be approved by lawmakers because the company’s service obligations are set out in legislation. It delivers parcels five days a week, Monday to Friday.
Kevin Hollinrake, the United Kingdom’s postal services minister,toldthe BBCWednesday that it was important to maintain a six-day service, and that Saturday deliveries were “sacrosanct,” in part, because many businesses, such as those producing magazines and greeting cards, required deliveries over the weekend.
Ofcom said Royal Mail was not currently providing a “reliable service” and change was urgently needed, a view shared by the company’s parent — International Distribution Services (IDS).
“It is not sustainable to maintain a network built for 20 billion letters when we are now only delivering 7 billion,” IDS CEO Martin Seidenberg told CNN in a statement.
The regulatorfinedthe company, which was owned by the UK government until itsprivatizationaround a decade ago, £5.6 million ($7 million) last year for failing to deliver mail on time.
At the time, Ofcom said the pandemic had significantly hampered Royal Mail’s operations, but that the firm could “no longer use that as an excuse” for poor performance.
Royal Mail reported an operating loss of £319 million ($407 million) in the six months to the end of September, up 46% from the loss it recorded during the same period a year earlier. Its parent company, International Distribution Services,saidlow revenues and the cost of a pay deal agreed with a major postal workers’ union were behind the loss.
Ofcom said its proposals were meant to start a “national discussion” about the future of Royal Mail — an institution that is more than 500 years old — and that it would hold events in the next few months with individuals and businesses to ask for feedback.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.