Editor’s Note:Sign up for CNN’s Stress, But Less newsletter.Our six-part mindfulness guide will inform and inspire you to reduce stress while learning how to harness it.
Spreading kindness not only helps others feel better about themselves — it can also boost the giver’s health and happiness, according to research. It’s a win-win for all.
Putting the well-being of others before our own without expecting anything in return — or what is called being altruistic — stimulates the reward centers of the brain,studies have shown. Those feel-good chemicals flood our system, producing a sort of “helper’s high.” Volunteering, for example, has been shown to minimize stress andimprove depression.
Being happier will help you live longer, so learn how to be happier
That’s not all: The same activity can also reduce the risk forcognitive impairmentand even help us live longer. One reason for this, experts say, is because kindness contributes to our sense of community and belonging. And that,studieshave found, is a key contributor to a healthy, longer life.
Giving donations to others, or “prosocial spending,” has been shown to reduce blood pressure and improve heart health. Onestudyasked a group of hypertensive people to spend $40 on themselves, while another group of people with high blood pressure were told to spend the money on others.
Why being an optimist is good for your heart
They found that those who spent money on others had lower blood pressure at the end of the six-week study. In fact, the benefits were as large as those from healthy diet and exercise.
Giving seems to lessen our pain. A recentstudyfound that people who said they would donate money to help orphans were less sensitive to an electric shock than those who declined to give. In addition, the more helpful people thought their donation would be, the less pain they felt.
How could this happen? The study found that regions of the brain that react to painful stimulation appear to be instantly deactivated by the experience of giving.
In the UK, researchers found that being kind could boost happiness in as little as three days. Thestudyassigned people to three groups: the first group had to do an act of kindness each day; the second group tried a new activity; and the third group did nothing. The groups who were kind and did novel things saw a significant boost in happiness.
You’ll experience even greater joy if you’re creative with your acts of kindness. Happiness researchers Sonja Lyubomirsky and Kennon Sheldonfoundthat people who did a variety of acts of kindness throughout the week showed greater increases in happiness than those who performed the same activity over and over again.
And here’s the good news: It seems acts of kindness can be anonymous or visible, spontaneous or planned, and can be as simple as giving a compliment or opening a door for someone.
OK, you’re convinced and want to jump right into being a kinder and more helpful person. There are literally hundreds of ideas on the internet, but here are a few to get you started:
That’s more than fair. Many people are struggling economically and are often overcome with balancing the needs of family, work and community. Consider being kind to yourself (in whatever way that means to you) as well as others. We all need a break.
Want more ideas? The Random Acts of Kindness Foundation, which promotes kindness all year, haslists of kindness ideas,organized by work, community, environment, animals, strangers, kids, seniors and more.
“You’re making the world a better place,” the foundation says. But don’t forget — any kindness you give to others is also a gift to yourself.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.