Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Uber wants to be the transportation company for everyone, no matter how passengers get where they’re going. That’s why the app will now give e-bikes and e-scooters the same prominence as car trips in two cities.
Uber(UBER)will show rentable e-bikes and e-scooters on the app’s home screen map in Atlanta and San Diego Monday. If the test goes well in the months ahead,Uber(UBER)said it hopes to expand it broadly in cities with e-bikes and e-scooters. Highlighting e-scooters — including ones from competitor Lime  as alternatives to Uber(UBER)’s core ridehailing business, serves asa reminder of Uber(UBER)’s desire to become a one-stop shop for transportation. Uber(UBER)wants to be the business of choicewhether a person takes a car, bike, scooter, train,helicopteror bus.
Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi previously said it aims to become the “Amazon of transportation,” a reference to how Amazon started by selling books before it expanded to sell almost everything.
One in five Uber trips is under a mile and nearly half are under three miles, according tothe company.Uber said last year that new e-bike riderstake fewer car trips, especially during rush hour – a change it welcomed.
“If somebody opens the app and maybe historically they would’ve taken a Uber that would’ve gotten stuck in traffic and instead they take a Lime scooter that may get them there faster, that’s really a success for us,” Billy Guernier, head of new mobility at Uber, told CNN Business.
To see nearby bikes and scooters, Uber users had to previously click a small button and be sent to a secondary screen. Uber’s effort to make e-bikes and e-scooters more prominent may encourage users to take them more often, especially for short trips.Uber’s competitor Lyft achievedrecord bikeshare ridershipin New York after integrating bikes into its app this spring.
The potential shift may prove popular with Uber drivers, who generally prefer longer, more profitable trips where profits tend to be larger.
Guernier said Uber would considerthe test in Atlanta and San Diego a success if more customers opened the app and book whatever type of transportation makes the most sense for them.
Uber expanded into car alternatives in 2018 when it bought thebikeshare startup Jumpand then launched itsown e-scooters in citiesin the same year. Users in Denver can comparepublic transportation routeson buses and trains through the app and buy a ticket. It alsolaunched “Uber Bus,”a shuttle van service in which riders can reserve seats, in Cairo, Egypt and Monterrey, Mexico.
Uber is also developingflying cars. It expects passengersto opt for autonomous, electric flying vehicles because of low prices and faster travel times.
Lime is currently the only e-scooter competitor Uber will promote in its app. Uber invested in the company in July 2018. It will receive a percentage of each transaction when Lime riders book trips through Uber.
Guernier said Uber views Lime not as a competitor, but a service provider.
“We’re thinking about what is best for consumers ultimately,” he said. “How do we make sure they can see the closest and best transportation options?”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.