Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Poland is selling up to 1,000 metric tons (1,102 tons)of its frozen butter reserves to bring down surging prices ahead of presidential elections in May.
The government’s strategic reserves agency announced the butter auction Tuesday, citing significant increases in butterprices worldwide that it blamed on a shortage of milk.
“This emergency action… should contribute to stabilizing butter prices in the market,” the agency said, according to a report by CNN affiliateTVN24, a local commercial news channel. The bidding process is due to start Thursday.
The agency said it would sell the unsalted frozen spread to businessesin 25-kilogram (55-pound) blocks, for the minimum price of 28.38 zlotys ($7) per kilo.
That is well below prices at Biedronka, one of Poland’s major supermarket chains. The retailer sells fresh butter for between 39.90-49.95 zlotys ($9.84-$12.32), depending on the brand, according to its website. The final selling price in the auction could, however, be higher than the minimum price.
It’s not unheard of for governments to tap into emergency reserves in order to boost supply and bring downprices. While such reserves are typically dominated by foreign currency or commodities such as oil and gold, some countries stockpile products deemed important to local diets. For example, in recent years, China has drawn from itsstrategic pork reservesand Canada has released stores ofmaple syrupamid shortages.
Related articleFood prices are on the rise again. What’s behind the increase?
In Poland, the skyrocketingprice of butter has become symbolic of wider cost-of-living pressures. Rafał Trzaskowski, the presidential candidate of the ruling party of Prime Minister Donald Tusk, recently accused Poland’s central bank of mismanaging inflation and offered to send the governor some butter as proof, according to the Financial Times.
Meanwhile, Jarosław Kaczyński, leader of the right-wing opposition Law and Justice Party, posted apicture on Xearlier this month of butter being kept in a safe to highlight how expensive the spread has become amid an overall rise in living costs.
“The current government is trying to intervene in advance (of elections),” Rafał Benecki, chief economist at ING Bank Śląski in Poland, said of the butter sales.
Year-on-year inflation in Poland came in at 3.9% in November, considerably above the equivalent rate across the European Union, official statisticsshowedWednesday. On the national measure of inflation, prices rose even more last month, by 4.7%.
That’s still well below the 18.4% peak reached in February last year but is an issue that surveys show is weighing on household spending, Benecki told CNN. And while retail butter prices are up around 20% compared with last year, wholesale prices have climbed 50%, signaling even higher prices for consumers ahead, he added.
According to theEuropean Commission, butter prices in the EU have jumped some 44% this year as dairy prices have surged around the world.
Last month, the Dairy Price Index published by the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization stood 20% above its level a year ago. Worldwide butter prices increased for the 14th consecutive month to a record high, due to strong demand and “tight inventories,” the UN body said in astatement.
Also in November, its broader Food Price Index, which tracks international prices of a range of food, reached its highest level since April 2023. However, the index still remains more than 20% below the peak recorded in March 2022.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.