Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
No more soup for the Campbell’s company.
The 155-year-old Campbell Soup Company plans to drop “soup” from its corporate name, rebranding as The Campbell’s Company. More consumers are reaching for snacks and ditching ready-to-serve soups, and the company has bought up other food lines to grab them.
In addition to its lineup of soups, Campbell now owns snack brands like Goldfish, Snyder’s of Hanover, Cape Cod, Pepperidge Farm and others. Campbell alsorecently boughtSovos Brands, maker of popular Italian food brands like Rao’s sauces.
“This subtle yet important change retains the company’s iconic name recognition, reputation and equity built over 155 years while better reflecting the full breadth of the company’s portfolio,” Campbell CEO Mark Clouse said Tuesday in a statement. The name change is subject to shareholder approval at the company’s annual meeting in November.
Although soup is an important part of Campbell’s business, it’s now a smaller portion of its sales.
Last year, Campbell’s snack sales grew 13%, while its soups grew 3%.
Legacy food companies like Campbell are pivoting to gain a larger share of the snack market,valuedat more than $200 billion by market research firm Circana.
Nearly half of Americans say they eat at least three snacks a day, according to Circana.
In August, Mars, the maker of M&M’s, agreed tobuy Kellanova, which owns Cheez-Its and Pringles, in a deal worth almost $29 billion.
“Snacking is a large, attractive, and durable category that continues to grow in importance with consumers,” Kellanova said at the time.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.