Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
WeightWatchers is getting into the booming prescription weight loss drug business.
The company, now known as WW International, will buy Sequence, a telehealth subscription service that connects patients with doctors who can prescribe weight-loss and diabetes drugs, including the hot new diabetes drug Ozempic.
WeightWatchers offers subscribers meal plans and other tools to lose weight. Oprah Winfreyhas a partnership with and stake inthe company.
The $106 million acquisition of Sequence will give WeightWatchers a foothold into the growing market for prescription drugs to tackle obesity and other weight conditions. Around 94% of US adults are classified as obese or overweight, according to the CDC.
As the market for new weight loss drugs soars, people with diabetes pay the price
“There is growing scientific evidence that, for some, prescription chronic weight management medications can address the biological components of obesity,” WeightWatchers said in a presentation about its Sequence purchase Monday.
Shares of WW International(WW)surged 20% during pre-market trading Tuesday on the news.
Although WeightWatchers didn’t specifically mention Ozempic or any other drug, the company noted that Sequence’s $99-a-month subscription plan helps connect customers to doctors who can prescribe drugs that mimic an appetite-regulating hormone called GLP-1.
The GLP-1 agonists Sequence helps prescribe include Wegovy, Ozempic, and Rybelsus.
These relatively new drugs work by stimulating the release of insulin, which helps lower blood sugar. They also slow the passage of food through the gut.
The FDA approved Ozempic for the management of diabetes in 2017 and Wegovy for weight loss in 2021.
Ozempic has gained popularity in part due to celebrities using it for weight loss.
But there are many concerns with using diabetes drugs for weight loss, including high costs and shortages that are making itharder for people with diabetesto obtain the drugs.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.