Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Ikea conquered the world with inexpensive furniture. Now it’s turning its attention to affordable homes in Britain.
Worthing, a town in southern England, is considering a plan to work with developer BoKlok, a joint venture ofIkeaand Swedish construction company Skanska.
The development would be BoKlok’s first in the United Kingdom since a previous project fell flat during the global financial crisis. The group, whose name is Swedish for “live smart,” has built more than 11,000 homes throughout Sweden, Finland and Norway.
Bybuilding homes in a factoryand assembling them quickly, the project could demonstrate one way to easeacute housing shortagesthat help drive up prices until they’re out of reach for average earners.An innovative sales model that charges people based on what they can afford could spark further change in the market.
The proposal for Worthing, which will undergo a more rigorous financial analysis over the coming months, details an unusual model for affordable living.
BoKlok would build roughly 160 houses on land leased from the local council, with 30% of units earmarked for public housing, according to a plan posted online. The first homes could be occupied within two years.
The remainder would operate under BoKlok’s “Left to Live” payment model, where residents are charged only what they can afford after taxes and living expenses.
Payments — typically around a third of net monthly earnings — go toward a 25-year mortgage.
Local councilors said in a statement that the project would let Worthing rapidly build homes that meet standards for quality.
A spokesperson told CNN Business that BoKlok’s modular housing — or homes that are made of fitted sections that can be made off site — would be particularly helpful in Worthing, which has limited land. Three times as many homes could be built in the area compared to a traditional development approach, he said.
Construction would start in January 2021, according to the proposal. Residents would be able to start moving in as soon as April of that year.
BoKlok said in a statement that it can’t confirm any projects at this time, but it’s looking into potential sites in the United Kingdom, particularly in the southern and western parts of the country.
The BoKlok approach to affordable and sustainable housing draws heavily on Ikea’s tried and tested methods.
“BoKlok was designed the IKEA way: large volumes, low prices,” according to a Skanskablog postfrom 2011. “Industrialized production and large volumes — in other words, repetition — cut prices and save time in planning.”
The venture also controls its entire supply chain, including land acquisition, factory production, site work, sales and marketing. That helps trim costs. Additionally, BoKlok relies on wood for the construction of homes, and doesn’t buy land unless it knows it can be developed shortly.
This efficiency has the potential to be lucrative. In 2017, BoKlok made up about half the homes Skanska sold in Sweden, and the company said the venture delivered “great” returns.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.