Editor’s note: A version of this story appeared in CNN’s Wonder Theory science newsletter. To get it in your inbox,sign up for free here.
Dinosaurs are all around us, figuratively and literally speaking.
Most of these diverse creatures went extinct 66 million years ago, but the ancient ancestors of modern birds are ingrained in the fabric of both scientific intrigue and pop culture.
Colorful dinos romp around in animated shows — and their more lifelike counterparts in “Jurassic Park” offer a menacing “what if” look at life alongside the massive reptiles.
Paleontologists uncover dozens ofpreviously unknown dinosaur specieseach year, enriching the view of what the world was like before humans set foot on it.
Scientistsdon’t always get it right the first timeas they try to envision long extinct creatures by piecing together their bones.
But imagine living during a time — only 200 years ago — when the existence of dinosaurs wasn’t common knowledge.
When massive fossilized bones were found jutting from the slate quarries in England’s Oxfordshire in the late 1600s, people thought they were once part of a Roman war elephant. The concept of dinosaurs, and even the word dinosaur, was centuries away from entering the public imagination.
But William Buckland, Oxford University’s first professor of geology, changed all of that in 1824 when he namedthe first known dinosaur: Megalosaurus.
The initial illustrations of the giant reptile weren’t entirely accurate, but Buckland’s discovery was the beginningof a new scientific field that is still growing today.
Paleontologists believe only a fraction of fossils have been found of dinosaurs that once populated the globe, meaning thousands or millions more species may await discovery.
Authorities have relocated the installation of a power plant near Rome after workers uncovered an ancient necropolis.
Archaeologists found 67 skeletons, many bedecked in gold jewelry, that had been laid to restsurrounded by precious items inside elaborate tombsdesigned to look like their homes.
“We found several skeletons still wearing their expensive stockings and shoes,” said Emanuele Giannini, lead excavation archaeologist at the site. “All these riches, and the fact that the bones show no sign of stress or physical labor, (leads us to believe) these weren’t local farmers, but upper-crust members of Roman families coming from cities.”
Many of the tombs were built for those who shared a family connection, and some skeletons were found wrapped around one another.
The race to the moon has heated up in the past few years, and now Japan’s lunar spacecraft will soon aim to demonstrate “pinpoint” landing technology. The SLIM lander, aka the “Moon Sniper,” is slated totouch down on the lunar surface on January 19.
And after a long wait, some of themost anticipated space missions are preparing to lift offin fall 2024.
The NASA Europa Clipper will set off in October to see if Jupiter’s icy moon Europa has what it takes to support life in its subsurface ocean.
In November, the Artemis II mission is expected to send four astronauts on a journey around the moon. If the lunar venture is successful, it will pave the way for NASA and its partners to launch Artemis III — returning humans to the moon’s surface for the first time since 1972.
Prepare to see asky filled with celestial wondersthis year.
In addition to meteor showers and full moons, there will be multiple types of lunar and solar eclipses visible from different points around the globe.
One of the most anticipated is the total solar eclipse that will cross Mexico, the US and Canada on April 8.
And keep an eye out for the northern lights and southern lights in unexpected places as the sun’s activity heats up before it reaches solar maximum later this year.
A “living skin” is protecting the Great Wall of China against deterioration and erosion.
Scientists studied rammed earth portions of the iconic landmark. Builders made these sections by compressing natural materials with soils, and they have been considered a weak point in the structure.
Instead, researchers discovered that protective biocrusts, or networks of tiny, rootless plants and microorganisms, cover the soil surfaces. By studying samples, scientists determined thebiocrust-covered portions are three times strongerthan rammed earth sections without it.
“They thought this kind of vegetation was destroying the Great Wall. Our results show the contrary,” said Bo Xiao, a professor of soil science at China Agricultural University.
Take a closer look at these riveting reads:
— The Navajo Nation’sobjection to landing human remains on the moonprompted a last-minute meeting at the White House.
— To answer the need for clean energy, some experts believe it’s time to buildsolar farms in space that beam sunlightto Earth’s surface — but others saythe plan is too far-fetched.
— During expeditions to a remote part of North Greenland, researchers uncovered fossils of previously unknownpredator worms called “terror beasts” that ruled the seashalf a billion years ago.
— Newly processed versions ofVoyager 2 images show the true huesof Neptune and Uranus, revealing that the two worlds are more similar in color than previously believed.
Like what you’ve read? Oh, but there’s more.Sign up hereto receive in your inbox the next edition of Wonder Theory, brought to you by CNN Space and Science writersAshley StricklandandKatie Hunt. They find wonder in planets beyond our solar system and discoveries from the ancient world.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.