Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Jeff Bezos, the Amazon founder and chairman, congratulated Donald Trump on Wednesday for an “extraordinary political comeback and decisive victory” after the former president won re-election, wishing Trump “all success in leading and uniting the America we all love.”
“Big congratulations to our 45th and now 47th President on an extraordinary political comeback and decisive victory. No nation has bigger opportunities,” Bezospostedon X. “Wishing [Donald Trump] all success in leading and uniting the America we all love.”
Amazon chief executive Andy Jassy also congratulated Trump on his re-election.
“Congratulations to President-elect Trump on a hard-fought victory,”he wrote. “We look forward to working with you and your administration on issues important to our customers, employees, communities, and country.”
The reaction comes aweek after Bezos, the owner of The Washington Post, defended his decision to withhold his newspaper’s endorsement of Vice President Kamala Harris, asserting that endorsements create the “perception of bias.”
Related articleTrump campaign denies and revokes journalists’ election night credentials after critical coverage
Bezos, however, acknowledged the “appearance of conflict” in his decision, noting that his ownership of Amazon and space exploration firm Blue Origin has been a “complexifier for the Post.”
News of the non-endorsement immediately sparked backlash from Post reporters and readers alike, resulting in the resignation of nearly one-third of the paper’s editorial board and 250,000 readerscanceling their subscriptions. Current and former staffers alsoaccused the Amazon founderof engaging in “anticipatory obedience.”
For Trump, Bezos’ business holdings have long been one and the same, as evidenced by his repeated references to the so-called “Amazon Washington Post.” And Trump’s history of attacks on Bezos have not been reserved to the Post.In 2019, Amazon alleged that Trump, then in office, had abused his power to apply “improper pressure” on top Pentagon officials to bar the company from winning a military contract that would have netted the company significant windfall.
Trump has also publicly lambasted Bezos, posting atweetin January 2019 following a National Enquirer report the billionaire had engaged in an extramarital affair, writing he was “so sorry to hear the news about Jeff Bozo being taken down by a competitor whose reporting, I understand, is far more accurate than the reporting in his lobbyist newspaper, the Amazon Washington Post.”
“Hopefully the paper will soon be placed in better & more responsible hands,” Trump wrote.
Ahead of the election Tuesday, Trump’s campaign blocked a reporter for Amazon’selection night specialhosted by Brian Williams from covering the campaign’s watch party in Florida.
Tara Palmeri, a Puck’s political correspondent who was set to broadcast from the Florida event, hadher credentials revokedafter shepublished a pieceabout “anxiety” within the Trump campaign.
“I know I told you that I would be covering the Trump election night party from Palm Beach but turns out I have pissed off Trump’s campaign manager with my reporting and they decided to deny my credentials,” Palmeri said on the podcast “Somebody’s Gotta Win.”
On Wednesday morning, Amazon’s stock was trading up more than 3%.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.