Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Former President Donald Trump’sprojected returnto the White House made many shareholders of publicly traded companies a lot richer on Wednesday.
His victory is expected to usher in sweeping changes from the Biden administration, including a tougher stance on immigration and crime as well as a more hands-off approach to regulating businesses. It’s also producing significant rallies of individual stocks as well asthe overall market.
It’s too soon to say whether the gains will last. For instance, Trump has promised to introduce sweeping tariffs thatcould raise prices significantlyon just about everything that isn’t produced entirely in the US. That could end up hurting some of the companies that saw big gains on Wednesday.
For now though, here are the companies that experienced some of the biggest one-day jumps following Election Day.
Companies that manage private prisons and detention centers soared Wednesday on the expectation that Trump will detain more migrants who cross into the country illegally. That would mark a reversal from theBiden administration, which allowed migrants seeking asylum to legally work in the country while awaiting trial.
Shares of two private prison operators, GEO Group (GEO) and CoreCivic (CXW), surged 42% and 29% Wednesday, respectively.
Elon Musk ispoised to be rewardedfor his multimillion-dollar donation to Trump’s campaign — and efforts to get Trump reelected — with more favorable policies for the companies he owns, including Tesla, SpaceX, X and artificial intelligence startup xAI.
Of those companies, Tesla (TSLA) is the only one that’s publicly traded. Shares of the electric vehicle maker closed 15% higher Wednesday, while competing companies like Rivian (RIVN) and Lucid (LCID) plunged.
Trump’s victory is expected to result in looser banking regulation. The Biden administration, in contrast, had pushed for stiffer capital requirements aimed at safeguarding the nation’s largest banks from failing during times of heightened stress. Bank CEOs, including JPMorgan Chase head Jamie Dimon, heavily criticized the proposal drafted by financial regulators.
Related articleHere’s what Trump is proposing for the economy
Based on feedback he received, Federal Reserve Vice Chair for Supervision Michael Barr, a top financial regulator leading the effort to impose higher bank capital requirements, announced the original proposal would be revised. Still, banks have been on edge because even a small increase in capital requirements could hurt their profitability, since it means they could have fewer funds to lend out.
Shares of JPMorgan Chase (JPM), the nation’s largest bank, gained 11.5% Wednesday.
Meanwhile, shares of Discover Financial Services (DFS) popped nearly 20% Wednesday on the expectation that its proposed merger with Capital One (COF), whose shares rose 15%, will sail through under Republican leadership. Thus far, themerger proposed in Februaryhas been held up by financial regulators.
Generally, a Trump administration is expected to be more supportive of mergers and acquisitions compared to the Biden administration, which has sought to block many.
As a result, JetBlue hadpulled out of its dealto buy Spirit Airlines. But on Wednesday, shares of Spirit (SAVE) rose 9%, while shares of JetBlue (JBLU) closed 4% higher.
Trump positioned himself on the campaign trail as a pro-cryptocurrency candidate. At a bitcoin conference over the summer, he vowed to hold on to bitcoin the government seizes from criminals rather than auctioning it off, which is the current practice.
His Tuesday win brought bitcoin to a new record high level of over $76,000 and caused crypto-associated stocks to jump. Among the biggest gainers Wednesday was crypto exchange Coinbase (COIN), whose shares leapt by 31%.
Wednesday wasn’t all good news for stocks, though.
Retailers, including Five Below (FIVE), Wayfair (W) and Dollar General (DG), as well as toy manufacturers Mattel (MAT) and Hasbro (HAS), all closed lower Wednesday. Their declines are likely due to fears about Trump’s tariffs, which could mean products they sell become more expensive, since many of them are manufactured outside the US.
Green energy stocks saw some of the biggest declines for the day, as Trump is expected to prioritize fossil fuel energy production over other energy sources seen as more environmentally friendly. Shares of solar panel companies Sunnova (NOVA) and Sunrun (RUN) dropped by 52% and 30% Wednesday, respectively. Trump is widely expected to repeal tax credits and other incentives President Joe Biden pushed for in the Inflation Reduction Act.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.