Editor’s note:Before beginning any new exercise program, consult your doctor. Stop immediately if you experience pain.
With summer officially here, many people are excited to go hiking along their favorite local trails or tackle an out-of-town bucket-list hike. But before you grab your backpack and race out the door, hiking and safety officials urge caution.
Temperatures are already soaring in many parts of the nation and around the world, and high heat has the potential to make any hike risky — and even deadly.
Earlier in June, ayoung couple was rescuedon a hiking trail in the California desert after running out of water and becoming dehydrated. The boyfriend was conscious during the rescue, but the girlfriend appeared unconscious, and medical officials referred to her “severe condition,” according to KTLA in Los Angeles.
Related articleHeat wave shifts to New York and the I-95 corridor as search for more victims in the deadly New Mexico wildfires continues
Others have not been as fortunate. Last year, a14-year-old boy diedwhile hiking with two family members in Texas’ Big Bend National Park. The temperature was 119 degrees Fahrenheit (48 degrees Celsius). In 2021, a couple, their 1-year-old child and their dogall diedin California while hiking in Devil’s Gulch Valley on an extremely hot day. Experts said they likely perished from hyperthermia (an abnormally high body temperature) and dehydration.
In Phoenix, wheremore than 200 hikersare rescued every year — mostly due to hiking during the hottest part of the day — the city instituted a program toclose certain trailswhen the heat reaches excessive levels.
Despite these heat-related dangers, it’s possible to hit the trails safely when temperatures soar. Here’s how to do so, according to experts.
Whether it’s hot or cool, you should be in reasonable shape before tackling any hike. If you’re planning a hilly, 5-mile trek, for example, make sure you’re able to hike 5 challenging miles before arriving at the trailhead.
To prepare for heat, become acclimatized to hot weather. You can do so by taking short, easy hikes in warm weather, progressing up to longer, more difficult hikes in hot weather. If that’s not possible and you’re traveling to a hot locale for your hike, schedule the trek several days into the trip when your body will be more accustomed to the weather.
Related articleHow to exercise when it’s too hot outside
It’s also good to know your sweat rate, said Dr. Floris Wardenaar, an assistant professor of nutrition at Arizona State University in Phoenix. Wardenaar, who studies the physiological aspect of hiking, recommended weighing yourself before and after several hikes, then comparing any weight loss with the amount of water you consumed during the hike.
“Body mass loss is a good proxy marker of sweat loss,” Wardenaar said. “You shouldn’t lose more than 2% of your body weight on a hike.” If you’re losing more weight than that, you should be drinking more fluids.
Water is essential for any hike, no matter the season — but it’s critical in hot weather. Unfortunately, many people underestimate the amount of water they’ll need.
“Always hike with a water treatment device, too, and carry electrolytes,” Martinez said. Electrolyte tablets or drinks help replace the salts and minerals lost through sweat, which assists in preventing heat-related ailments such as heatstroke and heat exhaustion.
“Bring extra water, even if it’s heavy,” said Teresa Ana Martinez, executive director and cofounder of the Continental Divide Trail Coalition. The Continental Divide Trail stretches 3,100 miles (4,989 kilometers) from Mexico to Canada, including some 800 miles (1,287.5 kilometers) in New Mexico, where there’s plenty of desert terrain.
“The benefit of hiking earlier in the day versus later in the evening is that in the evening, the earth still holds heat from the day,” Wardenaar said. “It will radiate from the rocks, too.”
If possible, select a trail that winds through shady woods, along water or even in a cool canyon or cave. This way, should you struggle with the heat, you can find shade and water for cooling off.
A long-sleeve shirt and pants might seem counterintuitive on a hot day, but they’ll prevent sunburn and stop your skin and body from heating up.
A neck buff and hiking gloves are also a good idea, said Abe Christian, operations manager for the Florida Trail Association. The Florida Trail meanders more than 1,200 miles (1,931 kilometers) through the state, from Big Cypress Swamp on the southern tip of the peninsula to Fort Pickens in the panhandle.
“There are plenty of places on the Florida Trail where the sun can beat you to death,” Christian said. “So you need to cover your skin as best as possible.”
The buff can also double as a compress should the heat get to you. Just dip it in water and place on your head and neck.
Related articleHow to pick the coolest clothing for a heat wave
Make sure you have a fully charged phone in case you need to call for help. A portable battery is helpful, too. Martinez swears by a sun umbrella, which keeps the sun’s rays from heating your head. (Look for those with an ultraviolet protection factor, or UPF, label or a seal of recommendation from groups such as the Skin Cancer Foundation.)
If possible, bring along a friend. Sometimes when you’re experiencing dehydration, heat exhaustion or heatstroke, you’re not thinking clearly and don’t realize you’re in danger.
Related articleHow to prevent heatstroke and other heat-related emergencies
“If you start your hike and think it’s too hot, it’s too hot,” Martinez said.
Just turn around and come back another day, she said. Another tip: Turn around when half of your water is gone, even if you haven’t reached your goal.
“Your ego is your worst enemy,” Martinez warned. “People underestimate how quickly things can escalate. You don’t know when your body will say, ‘I’ve had enough.’”
Melanie Radzicki McManusis a freelance writer who specializes in hiking, travel and fitness.
Sign up for CNN’s Fitness, But Better newsletter series.Our seven-part guide will help you ease into a healthy routine, backed by experts.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.