Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Harley-Davidson’smotorcyclesales are struggling. Competing with Bird, Lime, Uber and Lyft might be an answer.
The classic brand, which has been around for116 years, is looking to reinvent itself as more scooters, e-bikes and ride-sharing services hit urban communities and offer alternative ways to get around in congested cities.
New transportation companies such as Bird and Lime have launched thousands of rentable e-scooters in cities but continue to face questions about productqualityandsafety. Harley-Davidson thinks it can do better,delivering eco-friendly but thrilling power forshort distances.
“It’s a huge opportunity,” said Marc McAllister, vice president of product portfolio at Harley-Davidson. “For people who are using Bird and Lime today, how do we give them a much better experience with a Harley-Davidson brand and lifestyle?”
The company is closely studying the sharing economy and how it could differentiate itself in what it views as a commodity marketplace, according to McAllister. Many scooter companies use the exact same model of scooter.
In January, Harley-Davidson released photos of two lightweight electric vehicle concepts that resemble slimmed down motorcycles, or electric bicycles without pedals. McAllister declined to say if Harley-Davidson would commercialize the concepts, or if consumers would own or rent them. But the effort was a way to excite potential consumers and show its interest in urban commuters.
The company also announced last week itacquired StaCyc, which makes electric balance bikes for kids.
Harley-Davidson’s sales have dropped for four straight years amid declining interest among younger people. In 2018, sales fell 10.2% as President DonaldTrump supported a boycottwhen Harley announced plans to shift some manufacturing overseas in response to tariffs. Harley knows it needs to shake things up, and perhaps commuters who’ve tried scooters and e-bikes or use ride-sharing services could opt for a Harley vehicles in the future instead.
Related articleHarley-Davidson buys electric bike maker for kids
Harley-Davidson, a brand built on roaring gas engines, finds itself among a growing number of companies building electric products with environmental benefits. Air quality is expected to improve in cities as fewer vehicles give off emissions. Electric vehicles also can be charged with solar energy, offering additional environmental benefits.
Harley-Davidson has long carried an outlaw image, due to motorcycling clubs such as Hells Angels, but its reputation could flip from bad boy company to good environmentalist. Some critics warn this type of reinvention could backfire.
Arun Sundararajan, a professor at New York University’s business school and author of “The Sharing Economy,” believes Harley-Davidson shouldn’t try to compete directly with Bird, Lime, Uber and Lyft. Access and convenience are selling points in the sharing economy, but Harley-Davidson’s strengths lie in the design and full package of its vehicles. Riders don’t select a specific brand of vehicle on apps like Bird and Uber.
Instead, he sees an opportunity for Harley-Davidson to sell a higher quality electric bike or scooter direct to consumers.
“It could position something that’s branded Harley as an alternative to scooter rental,” Sundararajan said. “There aren’t many iconic mobility brands. How can Harley take advantage of people radically changing how they transport themselves?”
Clyde Fessler, who retired from Harley-Davidson after 25 years in a variety of executive roles, welcomes an evolvingHarley-Davidson.
At age 77, he’s still taking out his five motorcycles with friends in a Harley-Davidson rider group.
“You mention the electric motorcycle and the old-timers raise an eyebrow,” Fessler said. “But some of the other people say this is exciting and they’re doing something different there.”
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.