Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
A version of this story appeared in CNN Business’ Nightcap newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free,here.
Lina Khan’s days at the helm of the Federal Trade Commission, where she has overseen billions of dollars worth of scuttled corporate tie-ups — and become a political lightning rod — are numbered. And Wall Street is salivating.
As Donald Trump prepares to retake the White House, it’s almost certain he’ll fire Khan, the most aggressive antitrust regulator in a generation and, therefore, an enemy of billionaire corporate executives who stand to profit from the industry consolidation that she’s spent the past three-plus years fighting.
Wall Street, which hasbeen on a tearsince Trump’s decisive victory last week, appears to be ready to turn the page on the Khan era.
Representatives for Trump’s transition team didn’t respond to a request for comment. The FTC declined to comment.
But while a lighter regulatory touch might be good news for executives, it’s less clear how consumers and workers will fare.
“Once Lina Khan is replaced at the FTC and the commission flips to a majority Republican … a number of changes will likely occur that are good for businesses, though arguably not good for consumers,” Jennifer Rie, a senior antitrust litigation analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence, told CNN in an email.
In conjunction with the Justice Department’s antitrust division, the FTC under Khan has blocked dozens of deals over concerns that greater consolidation undermines competition and makes it easier for companies to jack up prices and exploit their workers. That was the logic behind the FTC’s lawsuit to blockthe $25 billion megamergerof grocery chains Kroger and Albertsons earlier this year. Similarly, the FTC has gone after Big Tech, Big Pharma and even Big Mattress in the name of keeping competition robust.
Of course, business leaders (and the politicians who kowtow to them) don’t love the government getting in the way,and tend to argue that regulation stifles innovation. To them, Khan and her DOJ partner in trustbusting, Jonathan Kanter, represent a threat to the bottom line.
Elon Musk, the Trump supporter and Tesla CEO,posted on Xlast month that Khan “will be fired soon.” Barry Diller, the IAC chairman and billionaire Democratic donor,went on TVto call Khan a “dope” (though he later clarified: “I said, ‘she’s a dope.’ She isn’t. She’s smart but I believe overreaches in disrupting sensible business combinations.”)
Meanwhile, progressives and a handful of self-styled populist Republican “Khanservative” lawmakers say her approach to fighting industry consolidation is long overdue. (A bit awkwardly, one of Khan’s unexpected champions is none other than Trump’s running mate, Vice-President-elect JD Vance.)
On Saturday,Bloomberg reportedthat Gail Slater, an aide to Vance, is advising the incoming administration on a shortlist of candidates to replace Khan at the FTC, the agency tasked with promoting business competition and protecting consumers from monopolies.
In other words, it seems almost certain Khan’s tenure is coming to an end.
Since last week’s election, both Kroger and Albertsons shares have risen sharply as investors anticipate the deal would face little resistance under Trump’s FTC.
The regulatory posture “will likely be more relaxed under the incoming administration,” wrote David Kostin, Goldman Sachs’ chief US equity strategist, in a note last week.
With the economy humming and CEO confidence improving, Kostin wrote, merger and acquisition activity should rebound by 20% in 2025, compared with an estimated 15% decline in 2024.
Early signs of Trump’s personnel moves also appear to be giving some investors more confidence.
“A few days after Donald Trump’s election, we are feeling more sanguine about M&A activity,” said Brian Gardner, chief Washington policy strategist for Stifel, in a note. “We had previously cautioned that there was unlikely to be a big shift in policy, but we are rethinking this view based on the names who are being floated for key positions in the administration.”
Gardner specifically called outSusie Wiles, whom Trump tapped as his White House chief of staff, as “more mainstream than populist,” which he views as a “positive sign” for M&A.
Of course, that assumes the economy keeps chugging along at its current, remarkably strong rate if Trump follows through with his full slate of economic campaign promises,virtually all of whichcould send inflation soaring and force the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates — two conditions that would rather quickly sap investors’ enthusiasm for dealmaking.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.