Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Target has spent decades building a reputation for cheap chic home goods, clothing and other merchandise. But surging prices in recent years dented the luster of “Tar-zhay.”
The company reported Wednesday that sales at stores open for at least one year dropped 3.7% during its latest quarter from a year ago. It was the fourth-straight quarter of sales declines at Target (TGT). The company’s stock fell around 7% during pre-market trading.
Sales dropped primarily in discretionary categories last quarter, Target said, continuing a trend during the inflation spike in which customers spend on necessary items but pare back on stuff they don’t really need.
Target is a bellwether for consumers’ spending habits and the retail sector as a whole. Target’s core middle-class customer base has been strained by higher prices and pulled back on discretionary goods like home decor, electronics and nonessential clothing in favor of groceries and everyday essentials.
Target has also slumped because of its merchandise mix and higher prices compared to rivals like Walmart.
The chain stocks more non-essential merchandise compared to competitors such as Walmart(WMT)and Costco(COST). More than half of Target’s merchandise is discretionary. Target in recent years has added more food and essentials to its stores, but still trails Walmart, which gets around half of sales from groceries.
Walmart’s salesincreased3.8% last quarter.
Target is trying to lure back shoppers by cutting prices on some key items and adding its own brands.
Targethas slashed prices on more than 1,500 popular items starting Monday, ranging from butter to laundry detergent, as the retailer attempts to attract inflation-wary shoppers turned off by high prices.
The company also recently created a new house brand calledDealworthyto take on dollar stores and Walmart. The budget-friendly lineup consists of 400 items, from phone chargers to disposable plates and even underwear.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.