Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Tesla’s soon-to-be-unveiled pickup truck will have a starting price of less than $50,000, it will be a better truck than a Ford F-150 and it will outperform a Porsche 911,according to CEO Elon Musk.
“It just can’t be unaffordable,” Musk said of the truck during an interview on theRide the Lightningpodcast.
That price would undercut the trucks thatelectric truck maker Rivianplans to offer next year. The starting price of those trucks is expected to be just under $70,000. Ford is investing $500 million in Rivian andAmazon led a group of investorsputting $700 million into the Michigan-based company.
Related articleFord invests $500 million in electric pickup truck maker Rivian
Rivian’s trucks are designed especially to excel off-road, something Musk did not boastabout for Tesla’s truck. Musk did say, though, that it would excel on the road.
“This will be a better truck than an F-150 in terms of truck-like functionality,” Musk said, “and be a better sports car than a standard 911. That’s the aspiration.”
Musk has said on Twitter that the base pickup truck will have all-wheel-drive and “crazy torque” from two electric motors. Torque is a measure of pulling power.
Musk did not say to which version of the F-150 he was comparing the Tesla. There are many. Ford F-150 prices vary enormously from $30,000 for a simple work truck to more than $70,000 for roomy, luxurious trucks with powerful engines. Ford has also said it will make its ownall-electric version of the F-150.
Related articleFord to make all-electric version of its F-150 truck
Even at less than $50,000, the Tesla(TSLA)pickup would still cost more than the average truck. The average price paid for a pickup in America last month wasabout $37,000, according to the auto web site KBB.com.
The design of the Tesla pickup may be off-putting to many, Musk said.
“It won’t look like a normal truck. It’s going to look pretty sci-fi, it’s not going to be for everyone,” Musk said of the truck. “If somebody just wants a truck that looks like trucks have looked for the last 20 years, 30 years, or 40 years, this probably isn’t for them.”
Musk has said the truck would be unveiled this year.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.