Markets
Hot Stocks
Fear & Greed Index
Latest Market News
Hot Stocks
Airbus(EADSF)has secured two major orders from airlines based in the United Arab Emirates, jumping out to an early lead over rival Boeing in the race for new business at the Dubai Airshow.
Dubai-based Emirates announced Monday that it had ordered 50 A350s from Airbus, giving the wide-body jet a prominent role in a fleet that already includes theAirbus A380and Boeing 777.
The deal, worth $16 billion at list prices, replaces an Emirates order announced in February for 30 Airbus A350s and 40 A330Neos. Airlines typically negotiate substantial discounts to listed prices.
Related articleLondon to Sydney nonstop: 10 things we learned from the world's longest flight
Airbus received an additional order for 120 planes in its A320neo family from a budget carrier based in the UAE. Air Arabia said the $14 billion order would more than triple its current fleet strength.
The Dubai Airshow failed to produce big sales Sunday during its opening day. But the $30 billion in orders secured by Airbus could help spark more dealmaking before the event wraps up Thursday.
Boeing will beseeking to reassure potential buyersthat its 737 Max will soon return to service following crashes of planes operated by Ethiopian Airlines and Lion Air, killing 346 people.
Stan Deal, president and CEO of commercial airplanes at Boeing, told reporters in Dubai that the company still believes it can get UScertification before the end of this yearon the 737 Max. Regulators around the world have said they may need more time.
“We’re going to follow the [US Federal Aviation Administration’s] lead on this,” he said. “This airplane, the process, the tools and certification has to be safe and done well.”
Related articleBoeing stock soars: It still thinks 737 Max will fly next month
Boeing has continued to build about 42 of the jets each month even though it can’t deliver them while the plane is grounded. Boeing collects most of the money from a sale when a plane is delivered to an airline.
The US planemaker said in a statement Sunday that SunExpress, which operates flights between Europe, Turkey and vacation destinations, had exercised an option for 10 737 MAX 8s.
Yet the 737 Max isn’t the only problem Boeing(BA)faces.
The company warned last month it would cut the production rate for its 787 Dreamliner to about 12 per month by late next year because of diminished demand caused by the US-China trade war.
— Nada Altaher and Chris Isidore contributed reporting.
Most stock quote data provided by BATS. US market indices are shown in real time, except for the S&P 500 which is refreshed every two minutes. All times are ET. Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc. All rights reserved. Chicago Mercantile: Certain market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones: The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated, distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard & Poor’s and S&P are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices Copyright S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC and/or its affiliates. Fair value provided by IndexArb.com. Market holidays and trading hours provided by Copp Clark Limited.
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.